SECARYA
Zechariah

RANTA 1
I toltea astasse, mi attea loarya Lárius, i Héruo quetta túle ana Secarya i Erutercáno, yondorya Verecya, quétala: 2 “I Héru atánie túra rúşe atarildain. 3 Alye quete i lienna: Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Quera inde ninna, ná i Héruo quetie. Tá queruvan imne lenna, quete i Héru Hossion. 4 Áva na ve atarildar, innar i noe Erutercánor yámer: I Héru Hossion equétie: Á quere inde ulce tieldallon ar ulce cardaldallon – mal ualte hlasse hya túle hare ninna.  5 Atarildar, masse nar té? Ar i Erutercánor, ma coitalte tennoio? 6 Mal ma quettanyar ar axaninyar – yar antanen núronyain, i Erutercánor – uar roitane atarildar? Ar tá vistanelte sámalta ar quenter: I panonen i Héruo Hossion pa manen lengumnes ven – ve tielvar ar ve cardalvar – sie é acáries ven.”
	
CHAPTER 1
In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, the Lord's word came to Zechariah the Prophet, son of Berechiah, saying: 2 “The Lord has shown great wrath to your  fathers. 3 You say  to the people: So says the Lord of Hosts: Turn yourselves to me, is the Lord's saying. Then I shall turn myself towards you, says the Lord of Hots. 4 Do not be like your father, to whom the former prophets called: The Lord of Hosts has said: Turn yourselves from your evil ways and from your evil deeds – but they did not listen or come near to me. 5 Your fathers, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever? 6 But did not my words and my commands – which I gave to my servants, the prophets – pursue your fathers? And then they changed their mind and said: By the plan of the Lord of Hosts about how he would behave towards us – according to our ways and according to our deeds – so he has indeed done to us.”

	7 I canta *yuquainea auresse mí *minquea asta – i asta Hyevat – mi attea loarya Lárius, i Héruo quetta túle Secarya i Erutercánonna, yondorya Veracya ar indyorya Isto: 8 Lóme sinasse tíranen, ar cennen nér ye onortane carne rocco, ar sé tárane imíca i *saratussar i ear i nandesse. Ente, ca se táraner morne, rusce ar ninqui roccoli. 9 Quenten: “Manar sine, herunya?” Ar i vala carpala asinye quente: “Tanuvan lyen manar nalte.” 10 I nér tárala imíca i *sáratussar hanquente: “Sine nar té mentane lo i Héru vantien ter cemen.” 11 Tá hanquentelte i Héruo valanna, ye tárane imíca i *sáratussar: “Avantielme ter cemen, ar yé, i quanda cemen senda ar quilda ná.”

	7 On the four  twentieth day in the eleventh month – the month Shebat – in the second year of Darius, the Lord's word came to Zechariah the Prophet, son of Berechiah and grandson of Iddo: 8 In this night I was watching, and I saw a man who rode a red horse, and he was standing among the myrtletrees  that are in the valley. Furthermore, behind him stood black, brown and white horses. 9 I said: “What are these, my lord?” And the angel speaking with me said: “I shall show you what they are.” 10 The man standing among the myrtletrees answered: “These are the ones sent by the Lord to walk through earth.” 11 Then they answered the angel of the Lord, who was standing among the myrtles: “We have walked through the earth, and behold, all the earth is restful and quiet.”

	12 Tá carampe i Héruo vala, and quentes: “Héru Hossion, manen andave elye ua oravuva Yerúsalemesse ar Yehúro ostossen, yannar anaiel rúşea ter sine loar *otoquean?” 13 I Héru hanquente i valanna carpala asinye raine quettalínen – orávala quettalínen. 14 I vala carpala asinye yáme: “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Cimin Yerúsalem ar Síon uryala cimiénen. 15 Ar nanye ita rúşea i nórennar i marir mi varnasse. An ninya rúşe náne rie pitya, mal tai napanner i ormen. 16 Etta, sin quete i Héru: Naneménien Yerúsalemenna antala oravie. Coanya nauva carastana sasse, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. Á rahta olla Yerúsalem lestasermanen! 17 Á yama ata: Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Ostonyar ata samuvar úve mánaiva, ar i Héru ata oravuva Síonde ar ata ciluva Yerúsalem.

	12 Then spoke the Lord's angel, and he said: “Lord of Hosts, how long will you not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which you have been wroth for these seventy years?” 13 The Lord answered the angel speaking with me with gracious words – with merciful words. 14 The angel speaking with me cried out: “Thus says the Lord of Hosts: I give heed to Jerusalem and Zion with a burning concern . 15 For I am extremely wroth against the nations that dwell in safety. For my wrath was only small, but they added to the violence. 16 Therefore, so says the Lord: I have returned to Jerusalem giving mercy. My House shall be built in it, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts! Reach across Jerusalem with a measuring line!  17 Cry out again: Thus says the Lord of Hosts: My cities shall again have an abundance of good things , and the Lord shall again have mercy on Zion and shall again choose Jerusalem. 

	18 Ar ortanen hendunyat ar cenne, ar yé! rassi canta. 19 Ar quenten i valanna carpala asinye: “Manar sine?” Ar quentes ninna: “Tai nar i rassi yar vintaner Yehúra, Israel ar Yerúsalem.”
	20 Ente, i Héru tanne nin tanor canta. 21 Tá quenten: “Mana neri sine túlar carien?” Ar carampes, quétala: “Sine nar i rassi yar vintaner Yerúsalem tenna ua enge nér ye ortane carya, ar exi sine túlar tyarien te pale, hatien undu i rassi i nórion yar ortar rasse nórienna Yehúro sa-vintien.”

	18 And I raised my eyes and saw, and behold! four horns. 19 And I said to the angel speaking with me: “What are these?” And he said to me: “They are the horns that scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem.” 
	20 Furthermore, the Lord showed me four craftsmen. 21 Then I said: “What are these men coming to do?” And he spoke, saying: “These are the horns that scattered Jerusalem until  was no man that raised his head, and these others are coming to cause them to tremble, in order to throw down the horns of the nations that raise a horn against the country of Judah to scatter it.”

RANTA 2
Tá ortanen hendunyat ar cenne, ar yé! nér arwa lestasermo máryasse.
	2 Ar quenten senna: “Manna elye ména?” Quentes ninna: “*Lestien Yerúsalem, cenien manen palla ar anda nauvas.”
	3 Ar yé! i vala carpala asinye etelende, ar enge hyana vala ye etelende velien se. 4 Ar quentes senna: “Nora! Queta nessa nér sinanna: Mo maruva mi Yerúsalem ve latine restassen, castanen i şangaron queniva ar celvaiva enderyasse. 4 Mal inye nauva ramba náreva pelien sa, ná i Héruo quetie, ar nauvan alcarinqua enderyasse. 6 Tula, tula! Uşa i formenya nóriello, ná i Héruo quetie. An ve menelo súri canta ivintien le, ná i Héruo quetie.

CHAPTER 2
Then I raised my eyes and saw, and behold! a man having a measuring line in his hand.
	2 And I said to him: “Where are you going?” He said to me: “To measure Jerusalem, to see how wide and long it will be.”
	3 And behold! the angel speaking with me went forth, and  was another angel that went for to meet him. 4 And he said to him: “Run! Say to this young man: One will dwell in Jerusalem as in open fields, by reason of the throngs of people and of beasts in its midst. 4 But I shall be a wall of fire to surround it, is the Lord's saying, and I shall be glorious in its midst. 6 Come, come! Flee from the northern country, is the Lord's saying. For like the four winds of heaven I have scattered you, is the Lord's saying.”

	7 Tula, Síon! Uşa, elye ye mare as Vávelo selye! 8 An sin quete i Héru Hossion apa i Alcariqua ni-mentane i nórennar yar namper armalyar: Ye appa le appa hendenyo coron. 9 An yé! pálan mánya téna, ar nauvalte rauna vére núroltain! Sie istuvalde in i Héru Hossion ementaye ni. 10 Á yama yello ar sama alasse, Síono selye! An yé, túlan, ar maruvan endelyasse, ná i Héruo quetie. 11 Ar rimbe nóri nauvar napánine i Hérun enta auresse, ar oluvalte lienya, ar maruvan imíca lye. Sie istuval in i Héru Hossion ementaye ni lyenna. 12 Ar i Héru haryuva Yehúra ve rantarya i aire talamesse, ar ciluvas ata Yerúsalem. 13 Na quilda, ilya hráve, epe i Héru, an elévies aire mardaryallo.

	7 Come, Sion! Flee, you who dwell with the daughter of Babylon! 8 For so says the Lord of Hosts after the Glorious One sent me to the nations that seized your goods:  who touches you touches the ball  of my eye. 9 For behold! I am shaking my hand against them, and they shall be booty to their own servants! Thus you shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me. 10 Cry a shout of triumph and have joy, daughter of Zion! For behold, I am coming, and I shall dwell in your midst, is the Lord's saying: 11 For numerous nations shall be added to the Lord on that day, and they shall become my people, and I shall dwell among you . Thus you will know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me to you. 12 And the Lord shall possess Judah as his part on the holy ground, and he shall again choose Jerusalem. 13 Be silent, all flesh, before the Lord, for he has moved from his holy dwelling.

RANTA 3
Ar tannes nin Yohyua i túra *airimo tárala epe i Héruo vala, ar Sátan tárala ara formarya quetien ulco pa se. 2 Ar eque i Héru: “Nai i Héru lye-naityuva, Sátan! É nai i Héru lye-naityuva, isse ye icílie Yerúsalem! Ma nér sina ua uryala runda leptana et i nárello?”
	3 Yohyua náne vaina váre larmainen íre táranes epe i vala. 4 Mal hé carampe ar quente innar táraner epe se: “Á mapa oa i váre larmar yainen náse vaina.” Ar hé quente senna: “Yé, atyárien loimalya auta lyello, ar mo lye-topuva mirwe vaimainen.”

CHAPTER 3
And he showed me Joshua the chief priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and Satan standing by his right hand to speak evil about him. 2 And the Lord said: “May the Lord rebuke you, Satan! Indeed may the Lord rebuke you, he who has chosen Jerusalem! Is this man not a burning piece of wood picked out of the fire?”
	3 Joshua was clad with dirty raiments when he was standing before the angel. 4 But he spoke and said to  that stood before him: “Take away the dirty raiments with which he is clad.” And he said to him: “Behold, I have caused your error to pass from you, and one will cover you with precious robes.”

	5 Ar equen: “Á panyar poica *carvaitie caryasse!” Ar panyanelte poica *carvaitie caryasse ar tomper se larmainen lan i Héruo vala tárane ara se. 6 Ar i Héruo vala antane *vettie sina Yohyuan, quétala: 7 “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Qui tienyassen vantuval, ar peantienyar hepuval, tá yú elye namuva coanya ar yú hepuva pacanyar, ar lavuvan lyen tule ar auta imíca i tárar sís. 8 Sí hlara, a Yohyua i héra *airimo, elye ar hínalyar i tárar epe lye, an nalte neri i nar tanwa. An yé! Ettaluvan núronya, i Tuima. 9 An ela i sar ya apánien epe Yohyua: Erya sarnesse ear hendi otso. Yé, *sáran *sarierya, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. Ar mapuvan oa sana nóreo loima mi er aure. 10 Enta auresse,” ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion, “yaluvalde ilquen i exenna, lan nalde nu i liantasse ar nu i *relyávalda.” 

	5 And I said: “Let them put a clean turban  on his head!” And they put a clean turban on his head and covered him in garments while the Lord's angel was standing by him. 6 And the Lord's angel gave this witness to Joshua, saying: 7 “So says the Lord of Hosts: If in my ways you will walk, and my instructions you will keep, then you as well shall judge my house and will also keep my courts and I shall let you come and go among  who are standing here. 8 Now hear, o Joshua the chief priest, you and your children that are standing before you, for they are men that are a sign. For behold! I shall bring forth my servant, the Sprout. 9 For behold the stone that I have put before Joshua: On a single stone  are seven eyes. Behold, I am engraving its engraving, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. And I shall take away that land's error in one day. 10 In that day,” is the saying of the Lord of Hosts, “you shall call each to the other, while you are under the vine and under the fig tree.”

RANTA 4 
Ar i vala carpala asinye nanwenne ar eccoitane ni, ve nér eccoitana húmeryallo. 2 Tá quentes ninna: “Mana cénal?” Ar quenten: “Ecénien, ar yé! ea calmatarma, ilyarya maltava, arwa salpeo ingaryasse. Ar calmaryar otso ear sasse, é otso, ar i calmar yar ear ingaryasse samir rótar otso. 3 Ar eat *milloalda atta ara sa, er foryasse i salpello ar er hyaryasse sallo.”
	4 Tá carampen ar quenten i valanna carpala asinye, quétala: “Mana nati sine tear, herunya?” 5 Ar i vala carpala asinye hanquente, ar eques ninna: “Ma ual ista mana nati sine tear?” Equen: “Lá, herunya.” 6 Ar hanquentes ar eque ninna: “Si ná i Héruo quetta Seruvávelenna, quétala: Lá túrenen ar lá melehtenen, mal fairenyanen, equétie i Héru Hossion. 7 Mana nalye, a alta oron? Epe Seruvável oluval palar, ar sé taluva i *ingasar. Mo yamuva sanna: Erulisse! Erulisse!”

CHAPTER 4
And the angel speaking with me returned and woke me up, like a man awakened from his sleep. 2 Then he said to me: “What are you seeing?” And I said: “I have seen, and behold!  is a lampstand, all of it of gold, with a bowl at its top. And its seven lamps are on it, indeed seven, and the lamps that are on its top have seven tubes. 3 And  are two olive trees next to it, one on the right of the bowl and one on its left.”
	4 Then I spoke and said to the angel speaking with me, saying: “What do these things mean, my lord?” 5 And the angel speaking with me answered, and he said to me: “Do you not know what these things mean?” I said: “No, my lord.” 6 And he answered and said to me: “This is the Lord's word to Zerubbabel, saying: Not by power and not by might, but by my spirit, the Lord of Hosts has said. 7 What are you, o great mountain? Before Zerubbabel you will become a plain, and he shall bring the topstone. One will cry to it: Grace! Grace!”

	8 Ar i Héruo quetta túle ninna, quétala: 9 “Seruvávelo mát tulcuvat Coa sina; máryat yú telyuvat sa.” Sie istuvalde in i Héru ni-ementaye lenna. 10 An man nattirne i aure pitye yestaron? Samuvalte alasse ceniénen i latucenda sar mi Seruvávelo má. – Otso sine nar i Héruo hendi. Lelyalte sir ar tar i quanda cemende.
	11 Ar carampen ar quente senna: Mana teat i *milloalda atta i foryasse ar hyaryasse i calmatarmo?” 12 É carampen ata ar quente senna: “Mana teat i olva atta i *milloalduo, yat ter i laurea róta atta ulyat et mityattallo i laurea millo?” 13 Etta quentes ninna: “Ma ual ista mana nati sine tear?” Ar quenten: “Lá, herunya.” 14 Etta quentes: “Tú nát i *lívina atta yet tarit ara i quanda cemeno Heru.”

	8 And the Lord's word came to me, saying: 9 “Zerubbabel's hands will establish  this House; his hands will also complete it.” Thus you will know that the Lord has sent me to you. 10 And who despised the day of small beginnings? They will have joy by seeing the plummet  in Zerubbabel's hand. – These seven are the Lord's eyes. They go hither and thither in all the earth. 
	11 And I spoke and said to him: “What do the two olive trees on the right and on the left of the lampstand mean?” 12 Indeed I spoke again and said to him: “What do the two branches of the pair of olive trees  mean, that through the two golden tubes pour out from their interior the golden oil?” 13 Therefore he said to me: “Do you not know what these things mean?” And I said: “No, my lord.” 14 Therefore he said: “They are the two anointed ones that   stand before the Lord of all the earth.”

RANTA 5
Tá ortanen hendunyat ata ar cenne, ar yé! vílala *toluparma. 2 Ar quentes ninna: “Mana cénal?” Ar quenten: “Cénan vílala *toluparma, rangar quean anda ar rangar lempe palla.”
	3 Tá quentes ninna: “Si ná i hútie ya etelelya i quanda nórenna: Ve técina i parmo rantasse ya querna ompa ná, ilya pilu nauva aucirna, ar ve técina i parmo pontisse, ilquen ye anta vandar nauva aucirna. 4 Mentanyes, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion, ar menuvas mir i coa yeva pile ar mir i coa yeva anta húrala vandar essenyanen, ar lemyuvas coaryo endesse ar ammatuva sa, yú i toa ar i ondor sasse.” 
	5 Tá i vala carpala asinye túle ompa, ar quentes ninna: “Á orta hendulyat ar cena ya túla!” 6 Ar equen: “Mana sá?” Ar eques: “Si ná i éfa-lesta ya etelelya.” Yú quentes: “Sie ilcelta ná i quanda nóresse.” 
	7 Ar yé! i rinda canuina lat náne ortana ama, ar enge nís ye hárane endesse i éfo. 8 Ar i vala quente: “Si Olcie ná.” Ar nanhanteses mir i éfo ende, ar hantes i canuina lat assaryanna. 
	9 Tá ortanen hendunyat ar cenne, ar yé! nís atta ettúlet, ar súre enge mi rámattat. É sámette rámat ve i *orávo rámat. Ar ortanette i éfa ama, imbe cemen ar menel. 10 Ar quenten i valanna carpala óni: “Manna táleatte i éfa?” 11 Quentes ninna: “Carastuvatte sen coa Sínear-nóresse. Ta nauva tancave tulcana, ar se nauva panyana tasse, véra talmaryasse.”

CHAPTER 5
Then I raised my eyes again and saw, and behold! a flying scroll. 2 And he said to me: “What are you seeing?” And I said: “I am seeing a flying scroll, ten yards long and five yards wide.” 
	3 Then he said to me: “This is the curse that goes forth to the entire land: As written on the part of the book that is turned forwards, every thief shall be cut off, and as written on the back of the book, everyone that gives oaths shall be cut off. 4 I send it, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts, and it shall go into the house of the one who steals and into the house of the one who gives lying oaths by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house and shall consume it, also the wood and the stones in it.
	5 Then the angel speaking with me came forward, and he said to me: “Raise your eyes and see what is coming!” 6 And I said: “What is it?” And he said: “This is the ephah measure that is going forth.” He also said: “So is their appearance in the entire land.”
	7 And behold! the round leaden lid was lifted up, and  was a woman who was sitting in the midst of the ephah. 6 And the angel said: “This is Wickedness.” And he threw her back into the midst of the ephah, and he threw the leaden lid upon its mouth. 
	9 Then I raised my eyes and saw, and behold! two women came forth, and wind was in their wings. Indeed they had wings like the stork's wings.   And they lifted the ephah up, between earth and heaven. 10 And I said to the angel speaking with me: “Whither are they bringing the ephah?” 11 He said to me: “They will build her a house in the land of Shinar. That shall be firmly established, and she will be put there, on her own base.”

RANTA 6
Ar ata ortanen hendunyat ar cenne, ar yé! noroller canta ettúlala ho imbe oron atta, ar i oronti náner oronti urusteva. 2 Epe i minya norolle enger carni roccoli, ar epe i attea norolle morne roccoli, 3 ar epe i neldea norolle ninqui roccoli, ar epe i cantea norolle *picarwe, polde roccoli. 4 Ar carampen ar quente i valanna carpala asinye: “Mana té, herunya?” 5 I vala hanquente: “Té nar menelo súri canta, etelelyala apa tarie epe i quanda cemeno Heru.” 
	6 I norolle arwa i morne roccoron etelende Formeno nórenna, ar i ninqui etelender ca te, ar i *picarwar etelender Hyarmeno nórenna. 7 Ar i poldar etelender, ar pan cestanelte vanta ter cemen, quentes: “Mena, á vanta ter cemen!” Ar vantanelte ter cemen. 8 Ar yámes ninna ar quente ninna: “Cena, i etelender Formeno nórenna atyárier fairenya sere Formeno nóresse.”

CHAPTER 6
And again I raised my eyes and saw, and behold! four chariots coming forth from between two mountains, and the mountains were mountains of copper. 2 Before the first chariot  were red horses, and before the second chariot black horses, 3 and before the third chariot white horses, and before the fourth chariot spotted, strong horses. 4 And I spoke and said to the angel speaking with me: “What are they, my lord?” 5 The angel answered:“They are the four winds of heaven, going forth after standing before the Lord of all the earth.”
	6 The chariot having the black horses went forth to the land of the North, and the white ones went forth behind them, and the spotted ones went forth to the land of the South. 7 And the strong ones went forth, and since they sought to walk throughout earth, he said: “Go, walk throughout earth!” And they walked throughout earth. 8 And he called to me and said to me: “See,  that went forth to the land of the North have caused my spirit to rest in the land of the North.”

	9 Ar i Héruo quetta túle ninna, quétala: 10 “Á comya annar ho i etya lie, ho Ħeldai ar Tovía ar Yeraia. Ar elye, mena i imya auresse mir coarya Yosía yondorya Sefanya, yanna utúlielte ho Vável. 11 Ar mapuval telpe ar malta, ar caruval ríe, ar panyuvalyes caresse Yohyua yondoryo Yehosarac, i héra *airimo. 12 Ar carpuval senna, quétala: Yé, nér yeo esse Tuima ná, ar véra nómeryallo tuiuvas, ar carastuvas i Coa i Héruva. 13 É isse carastuva i Coa i Héruva, ar isse coluva i alcare, ar haruvas ar turuva mahalmaryasse. Yú *airimo euva mahalmaryasse, ar imbe i atta euva hanie raineva. 14 I ríe nauva enyalie cordasse i Héruva, enyalien Ħelem ar Tovía ar Yeraia ar Ħén yondorya Sefanya. 15 Ar i nar haire tuluvar ar carastuvar i coasse i Héruva, ar istuvalde in i Héru Hossion ementaye ni lenna. Ar si martuva qui é lastuvalde i Héru Ainolvo ómanna. 

	9 And the Lord's word came to me, saying: 10 “Gather gifts from the exiled people, from Heldai and Tobijah and Jedaiah. And you, go on the same day into the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah, to which they have returned from Babel. 11 And you will take silver and gold, and you will make a crown, and you will put it on the head of Joshua son of Jehozadak, the chief priest. 12 And you will speak to him, saying: “Behold, a man whose name is Sprout, and from his own place he shall sprout, and he shall build the House of the Lord. 13 Indeed he shall build the House of the Lord, and he shall carry the glory, and he will sit and judge on his throne. Also a priest  shall be on his throne, and between the two  will be an understanding of peace. 14 The crown will be a remembrance in the temple of the Lord, to commemorate Helem and Tobijah and Jedaiah and Hen son of Zephaniah. 15 And  that are far away will come and will build in the house of the Lord, and they will know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me to you. And this will happen if indeed you will listen to the voice of the Lord our God.

RANTA 7
Ar martane Lárius i Arano cantea loasse in i Héruo quetta túle Secaryanna, i cantea auresse mí nertea asta, ta ná, i asta Cislev. 2 Ar Vétel mentane Hyareser ar Rehem-Melec ar neryar arcien i Héruo aistie. 3 Carampelte i *airimonnar i enger i coasse i Héruva Hossion ar i Erutercánonnar, quétala: “Ma nainuvan i lempea astasse, tambe acárien ter ta rimbe loar?” 
	4 Ar i Héruo quetta túle ninna, quétala: 5 “Queta i quanda lienna i nóresse, ar i *airimonnar: Íre hempelde lamate ar sáme naire i lempea ar otsea astasse ter sine loar *otoquean, ma é hempelde lamate inyen? 6 Ar íre mantelde ar suncelde, ma ualde mante elden ar sunce elden? 7 Ma si ua i menta ya i Héru quente ter i noe Erutercánor, lan Yerúsalem en náne quanta quenion ar alya, sá ar i ostor yar pelder sa, ar queni en marner Hyarmesse ar i Tumna Nóriesse?”

CHAPTER 7
And  happened in the fourth year of Darius the King that the Lord's word came to Zechariah, on the fourth day in the ninth month, that is, the month Chislev. 2 And Bethel sent Sharezer and Regem-Melech and his men to ask for the Lord's blessing. 3 They spoke to the priests that were in the house of the Lord of Hosts and to the prophets, saying: “Am I to lament in the fifth month, as I have done through so many years?”
	4 And the Lord's word came to me, saying: 5 “Say to the whole people in the land, and to the priests: When you kept fast and had grief in the fifth and seventh month though these seventy years, did you indeed keep fast for me? 6 And when you ate and you drank, did you not eat for yourselves and drink for yourselves? 7 Is this not the message that the Lord spoke through the former prophets, while Jerusalem was still full of people and rich, it and the cities that surrounded it, and people still dwelt in the South and in the Low Country?”

	8 Ar i Héruo quetta túle ninna ata, quétala: 9 “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Anamnen – nanwiénen – alde name, ar lisse ar oravie alde care, ilquen i exen. 10 Ávalde lumna i nissen yeo veru aqúalie ar i hínan pen ontaru, i ettelea quenen ar i únan. Ávalde care ulce panor, quén i exenna, endaldasse. 11 Mal váquentelte lasta. Quernelte tarya almo, ar hempelte hlarultat hlariello. 12 Ar endalta carnelte torna ve sinca, uien hlare i Şanye ar i quettar yar i Héru Hossion mentane faireryanen ter i noe Erutercánor. Etta túra rúşe túle i Hérullo Hossion. 13 Sie, tambe íre yámen ar ualte hlasser, síve íre yámelte uan hlasse, quete i Héru Hossion. 14 Mal vintanenyet raumonen ilye i nórennar yar ualte sinte, ar véra nórelta náne ve ravanda apa anelte vanwe, pen erya quén lahtala ter sa hya marila tasse. É tyarnelte írima nóre ole ravanda.”

	8 And the Lord's word came to me again, saying: 9 “So says the Lord of Hosts: With justice – with truth – you are to judge, and grace and mercy you are to exercise, everyone to the other. 10 You are not to oppress the woman whose husband has died and the child without parents, the foreign person or the destitute one. Do not make evil plans, one against the other, in your heart. 11 But they refused to listen. They turned a stiff shoulder, and they kept their ears from hearing. 12 And their heart they made hard as flint, so as not to hear the Law and the words that the Lord of Hosts sent by his spirit through the former prophets. Therefore great wrath came from the Lord of Hosts. 13 Thus, like when I called and they did not hear, so when they called I did not hear, says the Lord of Hosts. 14 But I scattered them by a storm to all the nations that they did not know, and their own land was like a wilderness after they were gone, without a single person passing through it or dwelling there. Indeed they caused a desirable land to become a wilderness.”


RANTA 8
Ar i quetta i Héruo Hossion túle ninna, quétala: 
	2 “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Felmenyar uryar túra úrenen Yerúsalémen; túra ahanen uryan san. 
	3 Sin quete i Héru: Enutúlien Síonna, ar maruvan endesse Yerúsalémo. Yérusalem nauva estaina i osto nanwiéva, ar oron i Héruva Hossion, i Aire Oron. 
	4 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Yáre neri ar yáre nissi ata maruvar mi Yerúsalémo latine nómessen, ilquen arwa olwenneryo máryasse i úvenen réryaron. 5 I osto nauva quanta seldoron ar vendion i tyalir i latine nómessen. 6 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Ómu si nemuva úcárima mi hendu i  nótime quenion i lemyuvar lie sino mi ente auri, ma nemuvas úcarima mi ninye hendu? ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. 
	7 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Yé, rehtean lienya i nórello anaróreo ar i nórello yasse Anar núta. 8 Ar tyaruvanyet tule, ar maruvalte Yerúsalémo endesse, ar nauvalte lienya, ar inye nauva Ainolta, mi nanwie ar failie.

CHAPTER 8
And the world of the Lord of Hosts came to me, saying:
	2 “So says the Lord of Hosts: My feelings burn with a great heat for Jerusalem; with a great rage I burn for it.
	3 So says the Lord: I shall again come to Zion, and I shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. Jerusalem shall be called the city of truth, and mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the Holy Mountain.
	4 So says the Lord of Hosts: Old men and old women shall again dwell in the open spaces of Jerusalem, everyone having his  staff in his hand for  the abdundance of his days. 5 The city shall be full of boys and maidens that play in the open spaces. 6 So says the Lord of Hosts: Alhough this will seem impossible in the eyes of the few people that will remain of this people in those days, will it seem impossible in my eyes? is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. 
	7 So says the Lord of Hosts: Behold, I am saving my people from the land of sunrise and from the land where the Sun sets. 8 And I shall cause them to come, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and they shall be my people, and I shall be their God, in truth and justice. 

	9 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Cara máldat polde, elde i mi auri sine hlárar quettar sine i antollon i Erutercánoron, ve mí aure yasse i Coa i Héruva Hossion náne tulcana, carastien i Corda. 10 Nó auri sine *paityale úne antana atanin, ar *paityale celvain ua enge, ar yen túle ar yen oante ua enge raine i ñottollo, ar tyarnen cos imíca ilye atani, ilquen nála cotya i exen. 11 Mal sí lá nauvan ve mí noe auri in lemyar lie sino, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion.  12 An euva erde raineva; i liantasse antauva yáverya, ar cemen antauva yávierya, ar menel antauva rosserya, ar tyaruvan i lemyar lie sino harya ilye nati sine. 13 Ar tambe anaielde hútie imíca i nóri, a nosse Yehúro ar Israélo, síve rehtuvan le, ar nauvalde aistie. Áva ruce! Nai máldat nauvat polde!

	9 Thus says the Lord of Hosts: Make your hands strong, you that in these days are hearing these words from the mouths of the prophets, as in the day when the House of the Lord of Hosts was established, in order to build the Temple. 10 Before these days payment was not given to men, and payment for animals  was not, and  the one that came and for  that went away  was not peace from the enemy, and I caused conflict among all men, everyone being hostile to the other. 11 But now I shall not be like in the former days to  that remain of this people, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. 12 For  shall be a seed of peace; the vine shall give its fruit, and earth shall give its harvest, and heaven shall give its dew, and I shall cause  that remain of this people to possess all these things. 13 For as you have been a curse among the nations, o house of Judah and Israel, so I shall save you, and you shall become a blessing. Do not fear! May your hands be strong! 
	
	14 An sin quete i Héru Hossion: Tambe panonya náne i talumnen lenna úro íre atarildar carner ni rúşea, i Héru quete, ar únen vista sámanya, 15 síve panonya mi auri sine ná i caruvan ya mára ná Yerúsalémen ar i nossen Yehúro. Áva ruce! 
	16 Sine nar i nati yar mauya len care: Queta i nanwie, quén i exenna. Nanwiénen ar i namiénen raineva á name andoldassen! 17 Áva care ulce panor, quén i exenna, endaldasse. Ente, húrala vanda áva mele, an ilye sine nar nati yar tevin, ná i Héruo quetie.”
	18 I quetta i Héruo Hossion túle ninna, quétala: 19 “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: I lamate i cantea astasse, i lamate i enquea astasse, i lamate i ostea astasse ar i lamate i quainea astasse oluvar lúmi máriéva ar alasseva Yehúro nossen, é merye aşari. Ar mela nanwie ar raine!
	20 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Lier ena tuluvar, é i marir rimbe ostossen. 21 Tá i marir er ostosse lelyuvar exenna ar quetuvar: Alve lelya lintiénen arcien i Héruo aistie, ar cestien i Héru Hossion. Yú inye lelyuva! 22 Rimbe lier ar taure nóri tuluvar cestien i Héru Hossion mi Yerúsalem, ar arcien i Héruo aistie.
	23 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Ente auressen neri quean ilye i lambion i nórion mapuvar i lane Yúra nerwa ar quetuvar: Lava men lelya aselde, an ahlárielme in Eru aselde ná!”

	14 For so says the Lord of Hosts: As my plan was that I would bring upon you evil when your fathers made me wroth, the Lord says, and I did not change my mind, 15 so my plan in these days is that I will do what is good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not fear!
	16 These are the things that it is necessary for you to do: Speak the truth, one to the other. By truth and by judgement of peace  judge in your gates. 17 Do not make evil plans, one against the other, in your heart. Furthermore, a lying oath do not love, for all these are things that I hate, is the Lord's saying.
	18 The word of the Lord of Hosts came to me, saying: 19 “So says the Lord of Hosts: The fast in the fourth month, the fast in the sixth month, the fast in the seventh month and the fast in the tenth month shall become times of happiness and of joy to the house of Judah, indeed festive festivals. And love truth and peace!
	20 So says the Lord of Hosts: Peoples shall yet come, indeed  that dwell in numerous cities. 21 Then  that dwell in one city shall go to another and say: Let us go quickly to ask for the Lord's blessing, and to seek the Lord of Hosts. I too will go! 22 Numerous peoples and mighty nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to ask for the Lord's blessing.
	23 So says the Lord of Hosts: In those days ten men of all the languages of the nations shall seize the hem of a Jewish man and say: Let us go with you , for we have heard that God is with you!”

RANTA 9
Menta.
	I Héruo quetta ná ana Harraco nóre, ar Lamascus ná i nóme yasse sa séra. An querna i Hérunna ná atano hen, ar i hen i nossion Israélo.
	2 Yú Hamat caita rénaryasse, Tír ar Siron, an ita saila nás. 3 Tír acarastie taras *insan. Ohosties telpe ve asto ar malta ve luxo i malleron. 4 Yé, i Héru mapuva oa armaryar, ar mir ear hatuvas túrerya, ar sá uryuva i ruivesse. 5 Ascelon tiruva ar rucuva, Asa perperuva túra aice – yú Ecron, pan i estel ya sámes anaies nucumna. I aran nauva vanwa Asallo, ar mi Ascelon *úquen maruva. 6 Yondo nóna vesto etsesse maruva mi Astor, ar auciruvan i Filistaron turquimie. 7 Ar mapuvan oa i nati vahtane sercenen antoryallo ar i faice mattar ho imbi nelciryar. Yú isse termaruva Ainolvan, ar nauvas ve turco mi Yehúra. Ecron nauva ve quén Yevusello. 8 Ortauvan *lancoanya epe Coanya ve cundo, ana aiquen autala hya nanwénala. *Úquen ye lumna ata lahtuva te, an sí ecénien véra hendinyanen.
	9 Sama túra alasse, Síono selye! Á yama yellor, Yerúsalémo selye! Ela, aranelya túla lyenna; faila ar túrula náse, nalda ar onortala *pellope, é *rocolleo nessa onna! 10 Ar auciruvan i norolle Efraïmello ar i rocco Yerúsalemello, ar i quinga ohtava nauva rácina. Ar quetuvas raine i nórennar. Turierya rahtuva earello earenna, ar i Sírello mettannar cemeno. XXX

CHAPTER 9
A message.
	The Lord's word is against the land of Hadrak, and Damascus is the place where it is resting. For turned towards the Lord is the eye of man, and the eye of the tribes of Israel.
	2 Also Hamath lies on its border, Tyre and Sidon, for exceedingly wise it is. 3 Tyre has built a fortress for itself. It has gathered silver like dust and gold like mud of the streets. 4 Behold, the Lord will take away its goods, and into the sea he will throw its power, and itself will burn in the fire. 5 Ashkalon shall watch and fear, Gaza will suffer great pain – also Ekron, for the hope that it had has been humiliated. The king will be gone from Gaza, and in Ashkelon no one will dwell. 6 A son born outside of marriage shall dwell in Ashdod, and I shall cut off the haughtiness of the Philistines. 7 And I will take away the things defiled with blood from his mouth and the disgusting foods from between his teeth. Also he will remain for our God, and he will be like a chief in Judah. Ekron will be like a person from Jebus. 8 I will erect my tent before my House like a guardian, against anyone going away or returning. Nobody who oppresses will again pass against them, for this I have seen with my own eye.
	9 Have great joy, daughter of Zion! Cry triumphant shouts, daughter of Jerusalem! Behold, your king is coming to you, just and victorious  he is, lowly and riding a she-ass, indeed a donkey's young offspring! 10 And I shall cut off the chariot from Ephraim and the horse from Jerusalem, and the bow of war shall be broken. And he will speak peace to the nations. His reign shall reach from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth.

	11 Yú elye – vérelyo sercenen lehtuvan i queni mandolyasse i tampollo ú neno. 12 Nanwena i tarassenna, a queni mandollo i sí samir estel! Ente, síra cáran sinwa: Nampaityuvan len atwa masse! 13 An *yuhtanen Yehúra ve quinga ar panyane Efraïm sasse ve pilin. Valtauvan yondolyar, a Síon, yondolyannar, a Yávan, ar lye-caruvan ve macil nerdova. 14 I Héru apantuvaxe or te, ar pilindya etelelyuva ve íta! I Túr Héru lamyuva i róma, ar lelyuvas raumonen Hyarmello. 15 I Héru Hossion varyuva te. Ammatuvalte ar turúvar i sarninen *hatilattallon. Ar sucuvalte ar caruvar ran, ve au suncelte limpe. Nauvalte quátine ve salpe, ve i vincar i *yangwasse. 16 Enta auresse i Héru Ainolta rehtuva te ve lieryo lamáre, an nauvalte ve míri *şarnunto, mirilyala or nórerya. 17 An manen mára ar manen vanya ná, íre i ore care nesse neri ale, ar i vinya limpe, i vendi.

	11 You as well – by the blood of your covenant I shall release the people in your custody from the well without water. 12 Return to the fortress, o people from custody that now have hope! Furthermore, today I am making known: I shall pay you back a double portion! 13 For I used Judah as a bow and put Ephraim in it like an arrow. I shall stir your sons, o Zion, against your sons, Javan, and I shall make you like a strong man's sword. 14 The Lord shall reveal himself over them, and his arrow shall go forth like a flash! The King Lord  shall sound the horn, and he shall travel by storm from the South. 15 The Lord of Hosts shall protect them. They shall devour and shall conquer with the stones from slings. And they shall drink and shall make noise, as if they drank wine. They shall be filled like a bowl, like the corners on the altar. 16 In that day the Lord their God shall save them like the flock of his people, and they shall be like the jewels of a diadem, glittering over his land.  17 For how good and how beautiful  is, when the grain makes young men thrive, and the new wine, the maidens. 

RANTA 10 
Alde arca ho i Héru ulo, íre i lúme utúlie tuileo ulon. I Héru care i raumor hundiéva, ar antas tain ulolantar; antas ilquenen salque i restasse. 
	2 I coacordoni equétier únanwie, ar i ceşir tanwar ecénier huru. Pa úmirwe olori carpalte, ar lusta tiutale antalte. Etta avantielte oa ve mámar; perpéralte pan lá ea mavar. 3 Rúşenya urya i mavarinnar; paimetuvan i *nyénur. An i Héru Hossion cimuva alcarerya, Yehúro nosse, ar caruvas te ve meletya roccorya ohtasse. 4 Et tello ettuluva i ondo i vincasse, et tello i taxe, et tello i quinga ohtava, et tello ilya hér uo. 5 Yehúra nauva ve ohtari, *vattala ter i luxo i malleron mi ohta, ar mahtuvalte, pan i Héru ea aselte. Ilye i onortar roccor nauvar nucumne. 6 Antoryauvan Yehúro nosse, ar Yósefo nosse rehtuvan, ar tyaruvanyet nanwene. An oravuvan tesse, ar nauvalte ve au lá hehtanenyet. An inye i Héru Ainolta ná; hanquetuvan téna. 7 Ar Efraímo queni nauvar ve nerdo, ar endalta samuva alasse ve limpenen. Hínaltar tiruvar ar nauvar valime. Endalta samuva alasse mí Héru. 

CHAPTER 10
You request  of the Lord rain, when the time has come for rain of spring. The Lord makes the storms of thunder, and he gives them rain-falls; he gives to everyone grass on the field. 
	2 The house-idols have spoken untruth, and  who examine signs have seen a lie. About worthless dreams they speak, and empty comfort they give. Therefore they have walked away like sheep; they are suffering since  is not  shepherd. 3 My anger burns against the shepherds; I shall punish the he-goats. For the Lord of Hosts shall give heed to his glory, the house of Judah, and he shall make them like his majestic horse in war. 4 Out of them shall come forth the stone in the corner, out of them the nail, out of them the bow of war, out of them every master together. 5 Judah shall be like warriors, trampling through the mud of the streets at war, and they shall fight, since the Lord is with them. All that ride horses shall be humbled. 6 I shall strengthen the kin of Judah, and the kin of Joseph I shall save, and I shall cause them to return. For I shall have mercy on them, and they shall be as if I did not reject them. For I am the Lord their God; I shall answer them. 7 For the people of Ephraim shall be like a strong man, and their heart shall have joy as if by wine. Their children shall watch and shall be happy. Their heart shall have joy in the Lord.

8 Sipuvan téna ar comyauvan te, an etelehtien te, ar oluvalte rimbe ve anelte rimbe yá. 9 Ar reruvanyet imíca i lier, ar haire nóressen enyaluvalte ni, ar coituvalte as hínaltar ar nanwenuvar. 10 Nantaluvanyet et Mirrandorello, ar Assurello comyuvanyet, ar mir i Ilear-nóre ar mir Levanon taluvanyet; ar nóme ua faryuva tien. 11 Ar lahtuvas olla i ear şangiéva ar petuva falmar earesse, ar ilye i Nílo tumne nómi oluvar parce, ar Assuro turquimie nauva talana undu, ar Mirrandoro vandil turiéva autuva. 12 Ar antoryauvanyet mí Héru, ar esseryanen vantuvalte, ná i Heruo quetie.

8 I will whistle to them and I will gather them, for I have redeemed them, and they shall become numerous as they were numerous formerly. 9 And I shall sow them among the peoples, and in remote nations they shall remember me, and they shall live  with their children and return. 10 I shall bring them back out of Egypt, and from Asshur I shall gather them, and into the land of Gilead and into Lebanon I shall bring them; and  space will not suffice for them. 11 And he will pass over the sea of tribulation and will strike waves at sea, and the Nile's deep places shall become dry, and the haughtiness of Asshur will be brought down, and Egypt's staff of rulership shall pass. 12 And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and by my name they shall walk, is the saying of the Lord.

RANTA 11
Á panta andolyar, Levanon, lavien náren ammate *tulcaldalyar! 2 Na yaimea, a *nelmetussa, an i meletye aldar nar atalantie! Na yaimie, Váhyano nornor; i tiuca taure anaie círina undu!
	3 Hlara – i mavarion nainie, an alcarelta anaie hastana! Hlara – i ráve i rávion, an Yordano  turquimie anaie nancarna! 4 Sin quete i Héru Ainonya: “Na mavar i lamáren sátina nahtien! 5 I haryuvar te nahtuvar te, mal ualte fele cáma, ar i vacir te quetir: Na aistana i Héru, an nanye lárea! É vére mavariltar uar same *ofelme tien. 6 An uan ambe samuva *ofelme in marir i nóresse, ná i Héruo quetie. Mal yé, inye antauva ilquen mici atani mir i exeo má, ar mir má aranelto. Ar petuvalte i nóre, ar uan rehtuva aiquen et máltallo.”

CHAPTER 11
Open your gates, Lebanon, in order to let fire consume your cedars!  2 Be wailing, o junipers , for the majestic trees are downfallen! Be wailing, oaks of Bashan; the dense forest has been cut down! 
	3 Hear – the lament of the shepherds, for their glory has been marred! Hear – the roar of the lions, for Jordan's pride has been destroyed! 4 Thus says the Lord my God: “Be a shepherd to the flock set aside for slaughter! 5 Those that will possess them will kill them, but they do not feel guilt, and  selling them say: Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich! Indeed their own shepherds do not have compassion for them. 6 For I shall not more have compassion for  who live in the land, is the Lord's saying. But behold, I shall give everyone among men into the hand of the other, and into the hand of their king. And they shall strike the land, and I will not save anyone out of their hand.

	7 Sie anen mavar i lamáren sátina nahtien – é elden i moiar mí lamáre. Ar nampen nin olwen atta; i mine estanen Lisse, ar i exe estanen Yanwe. Ar anen mavar i lamáren.
	8 Ar aucirnen mavari nelde erya astasse, an cólenya aselte pustane, ar yú té yeltaner ní. 9 Tá quenten: “Uan nauva mavar len! Lava i máman ye qualuva quale, ar yen nauva aucirna náve aucirna! Pa i lemyar, lava ilya máman mate i exeo hráve!” 10 Ar nampen olwenninya Lisse, ar rancenyes, racienyan i vére ya carnen as ilye i lier. 11 É anes rácina mi aure yana, ar i únar i lamáreo i ni-cimner sie sinter i ta náne i Héruo quetta.

	7 Thus I was a shepherd to the flock set aside for slaughter – indeed for you that are afflicted in the flock. And I took for myself two staffs; the one I called Grace, and the other I called Joint. And I was a shepherd to the flock.
	8 And I cut off three shepherds in a single month, for my patience with them ended, and they as well loathed me. 9 Then I said: “I will not be a shepherd for you! Let the sheep that is going to die, die, and  that is going to be cut off, be cut off! As for  that remain, let every sheep eat the flesh of the other!” 10 And I took my staff Grace, and I broke it, for me to break the covenant that I made with all the peoples. 11 Indeed it was broken on that day, and the destitute ones of the flock that gave heed to me thus knew that that was the word of the Lord.

	12 Ar quenten téna: “Qui ta mára ná henduldatse, ánin paitya, ar qui lá, áva.” Tá lundanelte nin ya paityumnelte nin: telpemittar *nelequean. 3 Ar i Héru quente ninna: “Ása hanta mir i harwe, i meletya nonwe yó sanalte i nanye valda.” Ar nampen i telpemittar *nelequean ar hante tai mir i Coa i Héruva, mir i harwe. 14 Tá rancen hyana olwenninya, i Yanwe, racien i otornasse imbe Yehúra ar Israel. 15 Ar i Héru quente ninna: “Á mapa lyen i tammar mavarwa ye care munta aşea! 16 An yé, ortauvan mavar i nóresse. Pa i aucirnar uas sanuva. Ente, uas cestuva i nessar, hya nestuva ye anaie harna, hya antauva matta yen olólie hlaiwa. I tiuca mámo hráve matuvas, ar *hyastaliltar racuvas. 17 Horro i úmirwa mavaren ye hehta i lamáre! Macil lantuva rancuryanna ar forya henyanna. Rancurya é hestuva, ar forya henya é oluva laceníte.

	12 And I said to them: “If that is good in your eyes, pay me, and if not, do not.” Then they weighted  what they were going to pay me: thirty silver-pieces. 13 And the Lord said to me: “Throw it into the treasury, the majestic sum of which  they think that I am worthy.” And I took the thirty silver pieces and threw them into the House of the Lord, into the treasury. 14 Then I broke my other staff, the Joint, in order to break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel. 15 And the Lord said to me: “Take for yourself the tools of shepherd that does nothing beneficial! 16 For behold, I shall raise up a shepherd in the land. About the ones cut off he will not think. Furthermore, he will not seek the young ones, or heal one who has been wounded, or give food to one who has become sick. The flesh of the fat sheep he will eat, and their hoofs  he will break. 17 Woe to the worthless shepherd that forsakes the flock! A sword shall fall upon his arm and upon his right eye. His arm shall indeed wither, and his right eye shall indeed become blind.

RANTA 12
Menta. I Héruo quetta pa Israel. I quetie i Héruo ye palyane menel ar tulcane cemen, ar cante Atano faire enderyasse: 
	2 Yé, panyan Yerúsalem ve yulma ya care ilye i lier útulce, ar yú Yehúra apuvas íre paluvalte Yerúsalem. 3 Ar tuluva enta auresse i caruvan Yerúsalem ondo cólova ilye i liain; illi i nevir orta sana cólo é nauvar harne. Mal ilye nóri cemeno nauvar comyane sanna. 

CHAPTER 12
A message. The Lord's word about Israel. The saying of the Lord who stretched out heaven and established earth, and shaped Man's spirit in his midst: 
	2 Behold, I set Jerusalem as a cup that makes all the peoples unsteady, and also Judah it shall affect when they shall surround Jerusalem. 3 And it shall happen  in that day that I will make Jerusalem a rock of burden for all the peoples ; all that try to lift that burded shall be wounded indeed. But all nations of earth will be gathered against it.

4 Enta auresse, ná i Héruo quetie, petuvan ilya rocco rúciniénen ar ye se-onorta *handelóriénen, mal Yehúro nossenna pantuvan hendunyat, ar petuvan ilya rocco i lieron lacenítiénen. 5 Ar Yehúro turcor quetuvar endaltasse: “I marir Yerúsalemesse nar nin poldore i Hérunen Hossion, Ainolta.” 6 Enta auresse caruvan Yehúro turcor ve náresalpe mici aldar, ar ve uryala runda imbi limnar. Ammatuvalte ilye i pelila lier, foryanna ar hyaryanna. Mal Yerúsalemesse mo en maruva i osto véra nómesse – mi Yerúsalem! 7 Ente, i Héru rehtuva Yehúro mardar minvaye, pustien Laviro nosse ar i marir Yerúsalemesse ñetiello alcar túra lá Yehúro alcar. 

4 In that day, is the saying of the Lord, I shall strike every horse with confusion and  who rides it with witlessness, but against the house of Judah I shall open my eyes, and I will strike every horse of the peoples with blindness. 5 And the chieftains of Judah shall say in their heart: “ that dwell in Jerusalem are to me a strenght by the Lord of Hosts, their God.” 6  In that day I shall make the chieftains of Judah like a fire-pan among trees, and like a burning piece of wood among sheaves. They shall consume all the surrounding peoples, right and left.  But in Jerusalem one shall still dwell in the city's own place – in Jerusalem! 7 Furthermore, the Lord will save the dwellings of Judah first, to stop David's house and those who dwell in Jerusalem from getting glory greater than Judah's glory.

8 Enta auresse i Héru varyuva i marir Yerúsalemesse. I queni mici te i taltar nauvar enta auresse ve Lavir, ar Laviro nosse nauva ve Eru, ve i Héruo vala epe te. 9 Ar tuluva enta auresse i cestuvan nancare ilye i nóri yar túlar Yerúsalemenna. 10 Ar ulyauvan Laviro nossenna, ar innar marir Yerúsalemesse, faire lisseva ar arcandeva. Tá yétuvalte ní, sé ye *etérielte, ar samuvalte naire sen ve mo same naire erya yondon, ar nauvalte sáriesse sen, ve mo sáriesse ná minnóna hínan. 11 Enta auresse euva túra nainie Yerúsalemesse, ve i nainie Haral-rimmonen mi Mehindon·yonde. 12 Ar i nóre samuva naire, ilya nossecombe mici inte; Laviro nossecombe mici inte, ar nissiltar mici inte; Nátano nossecombe mici inte, ar nissiltar mici inte, 13 Lévio nossecombe mici inte, ar nissiltar mici inte, Símio nossecombe mici inte, ar nissiltar mici inte, 14 ilye i hyane nossi, ilya nossecombe mici inte ar nissiltar mici inte.

8 In that day the Lord shall protect  that dwell in Jerusalem. The people among them that stumble shall in that day be like David, and David’s kin will be like God, like the Lord's angel before them. 9 And it shall happen  in that day that I shall seek to destroy all the nations that are coming towards Jerusalem. 10 And I shall pour upon David's house, and upon  that dwell in Jerusalem, a spirit of grace and petition. Then they shall look at me, he whom they have pierced, and they shall have grief for him like one has grief for an only son, and they shall be in bitterness for him, as one is in bitterness for a firstborn child. 11 In that day  shall be great lamenting in Jerusalem, like the lament for Hadad-rimmon in Megiddon valley. 12 And the land shall have grief, each family group among themselves; David's family group among themselves, and their women among themselves; Nathan's family group among themselves, and their women among themselvesm 13 Levi's family group among themselves, and their women among themselves, Shimei's family group among themselves, and their women among themselves, 14 all the other tribes, every family group among themselves and their women among themselves.

RANTA 13
Enta auresse ehtele nauva pantana Laviro nossen ar in marir Yerúsalemesse, poitien te úcariello ar úpoiciello. 2 Ar tuluva enta auresse, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion, in auciruvan i cordonion essi et i nórello, ar ualte nauva enyáline ambe, ar yú i Erutercánor ar i úpoica faire tyaruvan auta i nórello. 3 Ar tuluva i qui aiquen en quetuva ve Erutercáno, tá atarya yo amillerya yet se-ontanet quetuvat senna: Uatye coituva, an huru quetitye mí Héruo esse! Ar ciruvattes undu íre quétas ve Erutercáno. 4 Ar tuluva enta auresse in i Erutercánor feluvar nucumne, ilquen mauryanen, íre quetis ve Erutercáno. Ente, ualte coluva findicollo tyarien exi save huru. 5 Mal quetuvas: “Inye ua Erutercáno, an nanye nér ye mole to i cén, an atan vance ni néşenyasse.” 6 Ar mo quetuva senna: “Mana sine nahti imbe almolyat?” Tá quetuvas: “Tai yainen anen harna i coasse meldonyaiva.”

CHAPTER 13
In that day a spring shall be opened for David's house and for  who dwell in Jerusalem, to cleanse them from sin and from uncleanness. 2 And  shall come  in that day, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts, that I shall cut off the names of the idols from the land, and they shall not be recalled more, and also the prophets and the unclean spirit I shall cause to pass from the land. 3 And it shall come  that if anyone speaks as a prophet, then his father  and his mother who dual generated him shall say to him: You are not to live, for a lie you speak in the Lord's name! And they shall cut him down when he is speaking as a prophet. 4 And  will come  in that day that the prophets will feel humilated, each one by his vision, when he speaks as a prophet. Furthermore, they will not carry a hair-cloak to cause others to believe a lie. 5 But he will say: “I am not a prophet, for I am a man who works on the soil for a man sold me in my youth.” 6 And one will say to him: “What are these wounds between your shoulders?” Then he will say: “The ones with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.”   

	7 A macil, á etecuinu mavarinyanna, ar i veonna ye hare ninna ná! Peta i mavar, ar i mámar nauvar vintane, ar queruvan mánya i pityannar. 8 Ar tuluva mí quanda nóre, ná i Héruo quetie, i sasse ranta atta nauvat aucirne. Effiruvatte, mal i nelesta lemyuva sasse. 9 Ar taluvan i nelesta ter i náre, ar poituvanyet ve mo poita telpe, ar tyastuvanyet ve mo tyasta malta. Té yaluvar essenyasse, ar hanquetuvan téna. Quetuvan: “Ta lienya ná!”, ar té quetuvar: “I Héru Ainonya ná.”
 
	7 O sword, awake against my shepherd, and against the able-bodied man  that is near to me! Strike the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn my hand against the little ones. 8 And it shall happen in the entire land, is the saying of the Lord, that in it two parts will be cut off. They  will expire, but the third part shall remain in it. 9 And I shall bring the third part through the fire, and I shall purify it as one purifies silver, and I shall try it as one tries gold. They will call on my name, and I shall answer them. I shall say: “That is my people!”, and they will say: “The Lord is my God.”

RANTA 14
Yé, ré túla i Hérun! Tá i rauna mapana lyello nauva hyárina endelyasse. 2 É comyauvan ilye i nóri ohtacarien Yerúsalemenna, ar i osto nauva mapana, ar i armar nauvar píline i coallon, ar i nissi nauvar maptane, ar perta i quenion i ostollo autuvar ve etyar, mal i lemyar i lieo uar nauva aucirne i ostollo. 3 Tá i Héru etelelyuva, ar mahtuvas sane nórennar, ve íre mahtas mí aure ohtava. 4 Ar talyat taruvat enta auresse to i Oron *Milloaldaron, ya caita epe Yerúsalem i Rómesse, ar Oron *Milloaldaron nauva şanca enderyallo Rómenna ar Númenna, ontala ita hoa nande, ar perta i oronto levuva Formenna, ar pertarya Hyarmenna. 5 Ar uşuvalde ter i nande orontinyaron, ar i nande i orontion menuva tenna Asel. É uşuvalde ve úşelde íre cemen palle mi réryar Ussia aran Yehúro, ar i Héru Ainonya tuluva – ilye airiryar hilyala óse. 6 Ar tuluva enta auresse i lá euva cala; i meneldie calmar pícuvar. 7 Ar euva er ré ya nauva sinwa ve i Héruo ré – lá aure ar lá lóme, mal şinyenna euva cala.  

CHAPTER 14 
Behold, a day is coming for the Lord! Then the booty will be divided in your midst. 2 Indeed I shall gather all the nations to make war upon Jerusalem, and the city shall be seized, and the goods shall be stolen from the houses, and the women shall be ravished, and half of the people from the city shall go away as exiles, but  that remain of the people shall not be cut off from the city. 3 Then the Lord shall go forth, and he shall fight against those nations, as when he fights in the day of war. 14 And his feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives, that lies before Jerusalem on the East, and the Mount of Olives shall be split from its midst Eastward and Westward, creating an extremely big valley, and half of the mountain shall move Northward, and half of it Southward. 5 And you shall flee through the valley of my mountains, and the valley of the mountains shall go as far as Azel. Indeed you shall flee like you fled when earth shook in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and the Lord my God shall come – all his holy ones following with him. 6 And it shall happen  in that day that  will not be light; the heavenly lamps shall dwindle. 7 And  shall be a day  that will be known as the Lord's day – not day  and not night, but towards evening  will be light.

8 Ar tuluva enta auresse i coivea nén siruva et Yerúsalemello – perta i neno i rómenya earenna, ar i hyana perta i númenya earanna. Mi laire yo hríve martuvas. 9 Ar i Héru nauva Aran i quanda cemeno. Enta auresse i Héru nauva er ar esserya er. 10 I quanda nóre nauva vistana olien ve Arava, Évallo tenna Rimmon Hyarmesse Yerúsalemello, ar i osto nauva ortana, ar mo maruva sasse mí nóme yasse caitas, ho Venyamíno ando tenna i nóme yasse i minya ando ea, tenna i ando i vinco, ar  Ħananélo mindollo tenna i *vormar i aranwa. 11 Ar queni maruvar sasse, ar hútie nancariéno ua ambe euva, mal Yerúsalem maruva mi varnasse. 12 Ar si nauva i tarambo yanen i Héru petuva ilye i lier yar ohtácárier Yerúsalemenna: hrávelta queletyuva lan táralte talultatse, ar hendultat queletyuvat unquettatse, ar lambalta queletyuva antoltasse. 13 Ar tuluva enta auresse in euva mici te túra rúcinie i Hérullo; ar ilquen mici te mapuva armaroryo má, ar ortauvas márya ana i má armaroryo. 14 Ar yú Yehúra mahtuva Yerúsalemenna, ar i harmar ilye i nórion pelila sa nauvar comyane: malta ar telpe ar larmar mi túra úve.

8 And  shall come  in that day that living water will flow out of Jerusalem – half of the water to the eastern sea, and the other half towards the western sea. In summer  and winter it shall happen. 9 And the Lord shall be King of the whole earth. In that day the Lord shall be one and his name one. 10 The whole land shall be changed to become like Arabah, from Gebah as far as Rimmon south of Jerusalem, and the city shall be uplifted, and one will dwell in it in the place where lies, from the gate of Benjamin as far as the place where the first gate is, as far as the gate of the corner, and from the tower of Hananel as far as the vats of the king. 11 And people will dwell in it, and  curse of destruction will be no more, but Jerusalem shall dwell in safety. 12 And this will be the blow with which the Lord shall strike all the peoples that made war upon Jerusalem: their flesh shall rot while they are standing on their feet, and their eyes shall rot in their  hollows , and their tongue shall rot in their mouth. 13 And it shall come  in that day that  will be among them a great confusion from the Lord; and everyone among them will seize his the hand of his fellow, and he will raise his hand against his fellow's hand. 14 And also Judah shall fight against Jerusalem, and the treasures of all the nations surrounding it shall be gathered: gold and silver and garments in great abundance.

	15 Tarambo i imya nostaleo nauva i tarambo pétala i rocco, i *perrocco, i ulumpe ar i *pellopo, é ilye i celvar i euvar sane *estoliessen. 
	16 Ar tuluva in ilquen ye lemya i nórion yar túler Yerúsalemenna lelyuva ama loallo loanna *tyerien i Aran, i Héru Hossion, ar hepien i Meren Lassemárion. 17 Ar tuluva i qui aiquen i nossion cemeno loita lelya ama *tyerien i Aran, i Héru Hossion, tá ulo ua lantuva téna. 18 Ar qui Mirrandoro nosse loita lelya ama ar loita tule, perperuvalte i tarambo yanen i Héru petuva i nóri yar uar lelya ama hepien i Meren Lassemárion. 19 Si nauva i paime Mirrandorwa, ar i paime ilye i nóriva yar loitar lelya ama hepien i Meren Lassemárion. 20 Enta auresse nauva técina i roccoron nyellessen: Aire i Hérun, ar i tambini i Coasse i Héruva nauvar ve salpi epe i *yangwa. 21 Ar ilya tambin mi Yerúsalem ar Yehúra nauva aire i Hérun Hossion, ar illi i *yacir tuluvar ar mapuvar tambilli mici tai manwien apsalta. Ar ua ambe euva nér mancaléva i Coasse i Héruva Hossion enta auresse.
 
	15 A blow of the same kind shall be the blow striking the horse, the mule, the camel and the donkey, indeed all the animals that are in those camps.
	16 And it will come  that everyone who remains of the nations that came towards Jerusalem shall go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the Festival of Boots. 17 And it will come  that if anyone of the kindreds of earth fails to go up to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, then rain shall not fall upon them. 18 And if the house of Egypt fails to go up and fails to come, they will suffer the blow with which the Lord will strike the nations that do not come up to keep the Festival of Boots . 19 This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all the nations that fail to go up to keep the Festival of Boots. 20 On that day  shall be written on the bells of the horses: Holy to the Lord, and the pots in the House of the Lord shall be like bowls before the altar. 21 And every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holy to the Lord of Hosts, and all that sacrifice shall come and take some pots  among those to prepare their cooked food. And  will not be  man of commerce in the House of the Lord on that day.

