SEFANYA 

RANTA 1 
I Héruo quetta ya túle Sefanyanna, yondorya Cúsi, yondorya Eralya, yondorya Amarya, yondorya Ħiscia, mí réryar Yosía yondorya Amon, Aran Yehúro. 
	2 “Metyuvan ilqua ho cemeno palúre,” ná i Héruo quetie. 3 “Metyuvan atan ar celva. Metyuvan menelo aiwi ar earo lingwi. Tyaruvan i olcar talta, ar auciruvan atani cemello,” ná i Héruo quetie. 4 “Ar rahtuvan mányanen ilyannar i marir Yerúsalemesse, ar auciruvan nóme sinallo i lemyar Vaalo, i essi i *airimoron ettelie ainoin, as i hyane *airimor. 5 Metyuvan i lantar undu epe menelo hosse i tópassen, i *tyerir i Héru ar antar vandar sen, mal yú antar vandar Malcamen, 6 ar i  equérier pontelta i Hérunna, i uar cesta i Héru ar uar acárie arcande senna. 7 Na quilde nó i Hér Héru, an i Héruo aure hare ná! An i Héru amanwie *yacie; airitánies i aiálies. 8 Ar í auresse *yaciéva i Héruo “paimetuvan i condor ar i arano yondor ar illi i topir inte ettelie larmainen. 9 Paimetuvan illi i capir olla i fenda, i quatir i coa herultava ormenen ar hurunen. 10 Mi enta ré,” quete i Héru, “yamie ortuva ho i Lingwiando, nainie ho i Vinya Canasta, ar túra ran i ambollon. 11 Á naina, elde i marir mi Mactes, an ilye i macari nauvar vanwe, ar i notir telpe nauvar mapaine oa. 12 Martuva mi enta lúme i cestuvan ter Yerúsalem calmainen, ar paimetuvan i neri i olólier ve limpe hépina acca andave, i quetir endaltasse: I Héru ua caruva márie hya ulco. 13 Armaltar nauvar píline, coaltar nancárine. Ómu carastalte coar, ualte maruva tais; ómu empanilte tarwar liantassion, ualte sucuva i limpe.”   

CHAPTER 1
The Lord's word that came to Zephaniah, son of Kushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hizkiah, in the days of Joshia son of Amon, King of Judah.
	2 “I will put an end to everything  from earth's surface,“ is the saying of the Lord. 3 “I will put an end to man and beast. I will put an end to the birds of the heavens and the fishes of the sea. I will cause the wicked ones to falter, and I shall cut off men from earth,” is the saying of the Lord. 4 “And I shall reach out with my hand against all that dwell in Jerusalem, and I shall cut off from this place  that remain of Baal, the names of the priests for foreign gods, with the other priests. 5 I shall put an end to  who fall down before the host of heaven on the roofs,  that worship the Lord and give vows to him, but also give vows to Malcam, 6 and  that have turned their back at the Lord, that do not seek the Lord and have made petion to him. 7 Be quiet before the Lord Lord ,  for the Lord's day is near! For the Lord has prepared a sacrifice; he has hallowed  that he has summoned. 8 And on the day of sacrifice of the Lord “I shall punish the princes and the king's sons and all that cover themselves in foreign garments. 9 I will punish all that jump over the threshold,  that fill the house of their lord with violence and lie. 10 In that day,” says the Lord, “a cry will rise from the Fish-gate, lament from the New Quarter, and a great noise from the hills. 11 Lament, you who dwell in Maktesh, for all the tradesmen will be gone, and those that count money will be taken away. 12 It shall happen in that time that one will seek through Jerusalem with lamps, and I shall punish the men that have become like wine kept  too long,  that say in their heart: The Lord will not do good or evil. 13 Their goods shall be stolen, their houses destroyed. Though they build houses, they will not dwell in them; though they plant gardens of vines, they shall not drink the wine.”

	14 I Héruo túra aure hare ná, hare ar túlala lintave. Á lasta! I Héruo aure – tá i ohtaro yamie nauva sára. 15 Aure ahava ná enta aure – aure urdiéva ar şangiéva, aure nancariéva ar atalanteva, aure morniéva ar huinéva, aure lumbuquanta ar lilómea, 16 aure rómava ar ohtarambeva ana i ostor ca rambaltar, ar ana i táre vincatarassi. 17 Ar mentauvan şangie i atannar, ar vantuvalte ve laceníti, an úacárielte i Hérunna. Ar sercelta nauva etulyaina ve asto, ar hirdiltar ve múco. 18 Telpelta ar maltalta véla loituvar rehta te i auresse i Héruo ahava, ar uryala urşaryo nárenen i quanda cemen nauva ammátina. An metta, é rúcima tyel, taluvas ilyannar i marir cemende.

	14 The Lord's great day is near, near and coming quickly. Listen! The Lord's day – then the warrior's crying shall be bitter. 15 A day of rage is that day – a day of difficulty and tribulation, a day of destruction and of downfall, a day of darkness and of gloom, a day cloud-full and very dark, 16 a day of horn and war-cry against the cities behind their walls, and against the high corner towers. 17 And I shall send tribulation upon the men, and they shall walk like blind, for they have sinned against the Lord. And their blood shall be poured forth like dust, and their entrails like dung. 18 Their silver and their gold alike shall fail to save them on the day of the Lord's rage, and by the fire of his burning wrath all the earth shall be consumed. For an end, indeed a terrible conclusion, he shall bring upon all that dwell on earth.

CHAPTER 2
Alde ócome! Tula uo, a nóre lá méraina, 2 nó i námie anaie carna ar i aure avánie ve *ospor, nó i Héruo uryala rúşe tuluva lenna! 3 Á cesta i Héru, ilye i naldar i nóresse, elde i elengier ve namnaryar! Á cesta failie, cesta naldie! Cé nauvalde nurtane i auresse i Héruo rúşeva. 4 An Asa nauva hehtana, ar Ascelon nauva atalantea. Aslor mo eluva oa endesse i aureo, ar Ecron mo tucuva ama as şunduryar. 5 Horro in marir i ménasse ara Ear, Ceretyaron nóre! I Héruo quetta ana le ná! A Canáan, Filistyaron nóre – yú nancaruvan lyé, ar *úquen maruva tasse. 6 Ar i ména ara Ear oluva nesseler, arwe tamporon mavarin, ar pelmar mámain. 7 Ar nauvas ména in lemyar nosseo Yehúro. Tasse samuvalte nessele. Ascelondo coassen caituvalte i şinyessen, an i Héru Ainolta cimuva te, ar queruvas martolta.  
	8 “Ahlárien Moavo yaiwe ar i narace quettar i Ammonyaron, yainen quentelte yaiwe pa lienya ar ortaner inte vehteltanna. 9 Etta, ve inye coita,” ná i Héruo quetie, “Moav oluva ve Sorom, ar i Ammonyar ve Omorra, nóre *urtasirpiva ar singwa sapta ar ravanda tennoio. I lemyar lienyo mapuvar armaltar, ar i en ear nórenyo haryuvar te. 10 Si samuvalte pan anelte turquime – pan quentelte yaiwe ar ortaner inte i lienna i Héruo Hossion.”

RANTA 2
Assemble! Come together, O nation not wanted, 2 before the judgement has been done  and the day has passed like chaff, before the Lord's burning wrath shall come upon you! 3 Seek the Lord, all the lowly ones in the land, you that have behaved according to his statutes! Seek justice, seek lowliness! Perhaps you will be hidden on the day of the Lord's wrath. 4 For Gaza shall be abandoned, and Ashkelon shall be in ruins. Ashdod one will drive away in the middle of the day, and Ekron one will pull up with its roots. 5 Woe to  that live in the region by the Sea, land of the Cherethites! The Lord's word is against you! O Canaan, land of the Philistines – I shall also destroy you, and nobody shall live there. 6 And the region by the Sea shall become pastures, having wells for shepherds, and pens for sheep. 7 And it shall be a region for those that remain of the kin of Judah. There they shall have pasture. In the houses of Ashkelon they shall lie in the evenings, and the Lord their God shall give heed to them, and he shall turn their destiny.
	8 “I have heard Moab's mockery and the harsh words of the Ammonites, with which they spoke mockery about my people and raised themselves against their homeland. 9 Therefore, as I live,“ is the Lord's saying, “Moab shall become like Sodom, and the Ammonites like Gomorrah, a land of nettles and a salt pit and a wilderness forever.  that remain of my people shall seize their goods, and  that still exist of my nation shall possess them. 10 This they shall have since they were haughty – since they spoke mockery and raised themselves against the people of the Lord of Hosts.

	11 I Héru ruhtauva te, an sénen ilye cemeno ainor fifírúvar, ar queni lantuvar undu epe se, ilquen vehteryasse, to ilye falassi i nórion. 12 “Yú elde, queni Cúsello, nauvar nance macilinyanen.” 13 Ar rahtuvas máryanen Formenna, nancarien Assur, ar caruvas Nínive atalantea nóme, parca ve erume. 14 Ar lamári seruvar enderyasse, ilya hravan i nandeo. I erume-hó ar i rambe-hó véla i lómissen haruvar to i cari tarmaryaron. Ómatta liruva mí lattin. Atalante nauva to i fenda, an i toa nauva narcana oa. 15 Si ná i osto ya náne quanta alasseo, ya marne mi varnasse, ya quente endaryasse: “Inye i erya ná, ar ea munta ara ni!“ Manen atalantea olólies, nóme yasse hravani serir! Ilquen ye lahta ara sa sipe ar care faice hwermi máryanen.

	11 The Lord will frighten them, and because of him all gods of earth shall fade away, and people shall fall down before him, each one in his homeland, on all the shores of the nations. 12 “You as well, people of Cush, shall be slain by my sword.“ 13 And he will reach out with his hand to the North, to destroy Assyria, and he shall make Niniveh a ruinous place, dry as a desert. 14 And flocks will rest in its midst, every beast of the valley. The desert-owl and the screech-owl alike will in the nights sit on the heads of her pillars. Their voice shall sing in the window. Downfall shall be on the threshold, for the wood shall be torn away. 15 This is the city that was full of joy, that dwelt in security, that said in its heart: “I am the only one, and there is nothing beside me!“ How ruinous it has become, a place where beasts rest! Everyone that passes by it whistles and makes contemptible gestures with his hand.

RANTA 3 
Horro yan amortala ar vára ná, i lumna osto! 2 Uas alastie i óma, uas acámie paimesta! I Hérusse uas apánie estel, Ainoryanna uas utúlie. 3 Condoryar enderyasse nar rávie rávi. Námoryar nar ñarmor i morniesse; lavilte muntan lemya tenna arin. 4 Erutercánoryar nar turquime – cuvoiti neri! *Airimoryar acárier i yána úpoica. Acárielte orme i şanyen. 5 I faila Héru ea enderyasse; uas care ulco. Ilya arinde talas namieryar calanna; uas loita. Mal i úfaila ua ista nucumnie.

CHAPTER 3
Woe to the one that is rebellious and filthy, the oppressive city! 2 It has not listened to the voice, it has not received chastisement! In the Lord it has not put hope, to its God it has not come. 3 Its princes in its midst are roaring lions. Its judges are wolves in the dark; they let nothing remain until morning. 4 Its prophets are haughty – treacherous men! Its priests have made the sanctuary unclean. They have done violence to the law. 5 The just Lord is in its midst; he does not do evil. Every morning he brings his judgments to light; he does not fail. But the unjust one does not know humilation .

	6 “Nanacárien nóri; i vincatarassi olólier atalantie. Carnen malleltar luste, pen erya quén vantala tasse. Ostoltar nar atalantie – pen nér, pen erya quén ye mare tais. 7 Quenten: Au rie rucil nillo, au rie camil paimesta! Tá i osto mar úne nancarna, ar ilqua ya tallen sanna ua martane! Mal orontelte arinyave carien ulco; ahastielte ilye carieltar. 8 “Etta hopa nin,” ná i Héruo quetie, “tenna i aure yasse ortuvan ve astarmo, an námienya ná i lier nauvar comyane ar aranier talane uo, ulienyan téna ahanya, quanda uryala rúşenya. An uryala urşanyo nárenen i quanda cemen nauva ammátina. 9 An tá vistauvan i lieron questa mir poica lambe, yalieltan i Héruo essenen, náveltan núroryar almo ara almo. 10 Ho han i síri mi Cús, i queni i hyamir ninna – vintana lienya – taluvar annar nin. 11 Enta auresse ual ambe nauva nucumna ilye rohtalyainen yainen úacáriel nin, an tá mapuvan oa endelyallo i samir alasse návelyanen turquima, ar ual ambe nauva turquima aire orontinyasse. 

	6 “I have destroyed nations; the corner towers have become ruinous. I made their streets empty, without a single person walking there. Their cities are ruinous – without a man, without a single person who lives in them. 7 I said: If only you would fear me, if only you would receive chastisement! Then the dwelling of the city was not  destroyed, and everything that I brought upon it did not happen! But they arose early to do evil; they have marred all their doings. 8 “Therefore wait for me,“ is the saying of the Lord, “until the day that I stand up as a witness, and my jugdment is that peoples shall be assembled and kingdoms brought together, for me to pour upon them my anger, my whole burning wrath. For by the flame of my burning wrath the entire earth shall be consumed. 9 For then I will change the speech of the peoples into a pure language, for them to call upon the Lord's name, for them to be his servants shoulder by shoulder. 10 From beyond the rivers in Kush, the people that pray to me – my scattered people – shall bring gifts to me. 11 In that day you shall no more be humiliated by all your trespasses with which you have sinned against me, for then I shall take away from your midst  that have joy by your being haughty, and you shall no more be haughty in my holy mountain.

	12 “Lavin termare endelyasse nalda ar moica lien, ar cestuvalte cauma mí Héruo esse. 13 I lemyar Israélo uar caruva úfailie ar uar quetuva huru, ar cuvoite lamba ua nauva hírina mici te. 14 Yama yellor, Síondo selye! Á rama alassenen, Israel! Na valima ar merya ilya endalyanen, Yerúsalémo selye! 15 I Héru leryane lye paimelyallo, equéries oa ñottolya! I Héru, Aran Israélo, ea endelyasse; ual ambe rucuva ulcullo. 16 Enta auresse mo quetuva Yerúsalemenna: Àva ruce, Síon! Áva lave mályant lanta! 17 I Héru Ainolya ea aselye, Callo ye pole rehta! Nauvas valima elyenen, arwa alasseo! Seruvas melmeryasse. Nauvas valima pa elye rambinen alasseva. 
	18 I samir naire pa i merendi mapuvan oa lyello. Olólielte cólo lyen – nucumie. 19 Yé, mi enta lúme nancaruvan illi i lumnar lyen. Tá rehtuvan yeo vantie útanca ná, ar i náner éline oa comyauvan. Antauvan tien laitale ar mára esse mi ilya nóre yasse anelte nucumne. 20 Mi enta lúme tyaruvan le tule, é mí lúme yasse comyauvan le. An antauvan len mára esse ar laitale imíca ilye lier cemeno, íre queruvan martolda lan tíralde,” i Héru equétie.  

	12 “I let remain in your midst a lowly and gentle people, and they shall seek shelter in the name of the Lord. 13  that remain of Israel will not do injustice and will not speak a lie, and a treacherous tongue shall not be found among them. 14 Shout cries of triumph, daughter of Zion! Cry out with joy, Israel! Be happy and festive with all your heart, daughter of Jerusalem! 15 The Lord freed you from your punishment, he has turned away your enemy! The Lord, King of Israel, is in your midst; you shall no more fear evil. 16 In that day one will say to Jerusalem: Do not fear, Zion! Do not let your hands fall! 17 The Lord your God is with you, a Hero that can save! He shall be happy by you, having joy! He will rest in his love. He shall be happy about you with shouts of joy.
	18 “ that have grief about the festivals I shall take away from you. They have become a burden to you –  a humilation. 19 Behold, at that time I shall undo all that oppress you. Then I shall save  whose walking is unsteady, and  that were driven away I shall assemble. I shall give them praise and a good name in every land where they were humiliated. 20 In that time I shall cause you to come, indeed in the time that I shall assemble you. For I shall give you a good name and praise among all peoples of earth, when I shall turn your fate while you are watching,” the Lord has said.
