YÓNA
Jonah

RANTA 1

I Héruo quetta túle Yónanna, yondorya Amittai, quétala: 2 “Á orta, mena Ninivenna, i haura osto, ar yama sanna in ulculta utúlie ama epe ni.”
	3 Mal Yóna oronte norien oa Tarsisenna, oa i Hérullo. Lendes undu Yoppanna ar hirne cirya lelyala Tarsisenna. 4 Paityanes i lendan ar menne undu mir sa, menien aselte Tarsisenna, oa i Hérullo.
	5 Mal i Héru hante melehta súre i earenna, ar enge túra raumo i earesse, ar i cirya náne hare návenna rácina. 5 Ar i ciryamor runcer ar yámer, ilquen ainoryanna. Ar hantelte i armar i enger i ciryasse mir i ear, sa-lerien i cólollo. Mal Yóna, ménienwa i ammitya rantanna i ciryo, caine lorna. 6 Tá i hesto túle senna ar quente: “Manen ná i cáyal lorna? Á orta, yama ainolyanna! Cé i aino vi-cimuva, ar ualve qualuva.”
	7 Ar quentelte, ilquen i exenna: “Tula, alve hate *şanwali, istielvan man cóla i cáma i ulcun ya utúlie venna.” Sie hantelte *şanwali, ar i *şanwa lantane Yónanna.

CHAPTER 1
The word of the Lord came to Jonah, the son of Amittai, saying: 2 “Rise, go to Niniveh, the great city, and cry  to it that their evil has come up before me.”
	3 But Jonah arose to run away to Tarshish, away from the Lord. He went down to Joppa and found a ship going to Tarshish. 4 He paid for the journey and went down into, to go with them to Tarshish, away from the Lord.
	5 But the Lord threw a mighty wind upon the sea, and there was a great storm in the sea, and the ship was near to being broken . 5 And the mariners feared and cried, each one to his god. And they threw the goods that were in the ship into the sea, to free it from the burden. But Jonah, having gone to the innermost part of the shop, lay asleep. 6 Then the captain came to him and said: “How is  that you are lying asleep? Rise, cry to your god! Perhaps the god will heed us, and we shall not die.”
	7 And they said, each one to the other: “Come, let us throw lots, for us to know who is carrying the guilt for the evil that has come upon us.” Thus thew threw lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.

	8 Ar quentelte senna: “Nyara men, man cóla i cáma pa i urra nat ya amartie men? Mana molielya, ar mallo tulil? Mana nórelya, ar mana liello nalye?” 9 Ar quentes téna: “Nanya Heverya, ar rucin i  Hérullo, menelo Aino, ye acárie i ear ar i parca nor.”
	10 Ar túra caure nampe i neri, ar quentelte senna: “Mana si ya acáriel?” An i neri sinter in i Hérullo nóranes oa, an nyarnes tien. 11 Ar quentelte senna: “Man caruvalme lyen, carien i ear quilda ven?”  An i raumo en caine i earenna. 12 Ar quentes téna: “Áni orta ar áni hate mir i ear, ar i ear nauva quilda len, an istan in inye cóla i cáma pa i raumo caitala lenna.” 13 Ono i neri néver nanwene parca norenna ciryaltasse, mal ua ence tien, an i raumo en tyárane i ear amorta téna. 14 Tá yámelte i Hérunna ar quenter: “Iquilme lyello, a Héru, i ualme qualuva mapiénen nér sino coivie! Áva lave *cámalóra serce tule venna! An elye, Héru, acárie ve mernel.” 
	15 Sie nampelte Yóna ar se-hanter mir i ear. Tá i earo rúşe pustane, 16 ar túra caure i Héruva nampe i neri. *Yancelte *yancar i Hérun ar antaner vandali.

	8 And they said to him: “Tell us, who is carrying the guilt for  the evil thing that has happened to us? What is your work, and where do you come from? What is your country, and from what people are you?” 9 And he said to them: “I am Hebrew, and I fear the Lord, the Deity of heaven, who has made the ocean and the dry land.”
	10 And great fear seized the men, and they said to him: “What is this that you have done?” For the men knew that from the Lord he was running away, for he told them. 12 And he said to them: “Lift me up and throw me into the sea, and the sea shall be calm for you, for I know that I carry the guilt for  the storm lying upon you.” 13 But the men tried to go back to dry land in their ship, but it was not possible for them, for the storm was still causing the sea to heave against them. 14 Then they cried to the Lord and said: “We beg of you, O Lord, that we will not die by taking this man's life! Do not let guiltless blood come upon us! For you, Lord, have done as you wanted.”
	15 Thus they took Jonah and threw him into the sea. Then the wrath of the sea ceased, 16 and great fear of the Lord seized the men. They made sacrifices to the Lord and gave oath .

RANTA 2
I Héru mentane haura lingwe ye ammante Yóna, ar enges i lingwio cumbasse ter auri nelde ar lómi nelde. 2 Yóna hyamne i Héru Ainoryanna i lingwio cumballo. 3 Quentes:

	Yámen et şangienyallo i Hérunna, ar nin-antanes hanquenta.
	Mandosto súmallo rámen, ar hlassel ómanya.
	4 Hantelyen mir i núre neni endasse i earo, ar síre ni-pelde.
	Ilye falmalyar ar solmelyar – or ni lahtanelte.
	5 Ar inye quente: “Anaien hehtaina, hátina oa lyello. Manen ata cenuvan aire cordalya?”
	6 I nén rahtane axenyanna, i undume ni-pelde. Carinya náne rembina earuilesse.
	7 I orontion talmannar lenden undu. Cemeno andor náner holtaine ca ni tennoio. Mal tulyanel coivienya ama i sapsallo, a Héru Ainonya!
	8 Íre feanya olle milya nisse, i Héru ni-enyalde, ar hyamienya túle lyenna, mir aire cordalya.
	9 I cimir luste cordoni ehehtier i Eruanna ya sámelte.
	10 Mal inye – ómasse hantaléva *yacuvan lyenna. I vanda ya ánien hepuvan. Rehtie i Héruo ná!

	Ar i Héru canne i lingwin, ar qámes Yóna parca norenna.

CHAPTER 2
The Lord sent a great fish that swallowed Jonah, and he was in the belly of the fish for  three days and three nighs. 2 Jonah prayed to the Lord his God from the belly of the fish. 3 He said:

	I cried out of my tribulation to the Lord, and he gave me an answer.
	From the womb of Mandos I called, and you heard my voice.
	4 You threw me into the deep waters in the heart of the sea, and a river surrounded me.
	All your breakers and your waves – over me they passed.
	5 And I said: “I have been rejected, thrown away from you. How will I again see your holy temple?”
	6 The water reached to my neck, the abyss surrounded me. My head was entangled in seaweed. 
7 To the foundations of the mountains I went down. The gates of earth were closed behind me forever. But you led me up from the pit, o Lord my God!
	8 When my soul was weak in me, the Lord remembered me, and my prayer came to you, into your holy temple.
	9  that heed empty idols have rejected the grace that they had.
	10 But I – in a voice of thanksgiving I shall sacrifice to you. The oath that I have given I shall keep. Salvation is of the Lord!

	And the Lord commanded the fish, and it vomited Jonah onto dry land.

RANTA 3
Tá i Héruo quetta túle Yónanna mí attea lú, quétala: 2 “Á orta, mena Ninivenna, i haura osto, ar yama sanna i menta ya inye nyaruva lyen.” 3 Ar Yóna oronte ar lende Ninivenna, ve i Héru canne. Ar Ninive náne osto valainave haura, ve lenda aurion nelde. 4 Yóna *yestane mene mir i osto, er aureo lenda, ar yámes ar quente: “Íre rí *canaquean avánier, Niniveo atalante tuluva!”
	5 Tá Niniveo queni sáver Erusse. Yaldelte *avamatie ar tomper inte lannissen findiva, i túrar ar i cintar véla. 6 I natto yú rahtane i hlarenna i arano Niniveo, ar orontes mahalmaryallo ar panyane oa arna larmarya. Tompes inse lannessen findiva ar hande i litsesse. 

CHAPTER 3
Then the word of the Lord came to Jonah for the second time, saying: 2 “Rise, go to Niniveh, the great city, and cry  to it the message that I shall tell you.” 3 And Jonah arose and went to Niniveh, as the Lord commanded. And Niniveh was a city divinely great, like a journey of three days. 4 Jonah began to go into the city, one day's journey, and he cried  and said: “When forty days have passed, Niniveh's overthrow shall come!”
	5 Then the people of Niniveh believed in God. The called a fast and covered themselves in clothes of hair, the great and the small alike. 6 The matter also reached the ear of the king of Niniveh, and he arose from his throne and put away his royal raiment. He covered himself in clothes of hair and sat in the dust.

	7 I canwanen i arano ar calloryaron i tercánor yámer Ninivesse: “Atani ar celvar, mundor ar yaxi ar lamári véla – mata munta! Ávalte same matso, ávalte suce nén! 8 Alte tope intesse lannessen findiva, atan ar celva, ar alte yame melehteltanen Erunna ar quere inte oa, ilquen ulca malleryallo ar i ormello máltaron. 9 Man ista? Cé i Aino en vistuva panorya, hehtala rúşerya? Tá ualve nauva nancarne.”
	10 Ar Eru cenne cardaltar, manen equérielte inte oa ulce malleltallon, ar etta Eru vistane sámarya pa i urra nat pa ya quentes tyare tien. Uas tyarne sa.

	7 By the order of the king and of his nobles the heralds cried  in Niniveh: “Men and animals, oxes and cows and flocks alike – eat nothing! Let them not have food, let them not drink water! 8 Let them cover themselves in clothes of hair, man and animal, and let them cry with their might to God and turn themselves away, everyone from his evil way and from the violence of their hands. 9 Who knows? Perhaps the Deity will still change his plan, abandoning his wrath? Then we will not be undone.”
	10 And God saw their deeds, how they had turned themselves away from their evil ways, and therefore God changed his mind concerning the bad thing of which he spoke to cause them. He did not cause it.

RANTA 4
Mal Yónan ta náne ite urra, ar anes quátina rúşenen. 2 Ar hyamnes i Hérunna ar quente: “Ai, a Héru! Ma si ua ya quenten lan engen nórienyasse? Etta néven nore oa Tarsisenna i yestasse, an sinten i elye ná Aino raina ar ocámala, lenca rúşenna ar úvea mi Eruanna, ar vistala sámalya pa i urra nat.” 3 Ar sí iquin, a Héru: Á mapa coivienya nillo! An inyen qualme ná arya lá coivie.”
	4 Mal i Héru quente: “Ma cáral mai návenen rúşea?”
	5 Yóna lende et i ostollo, ar handes i osto rómesse. Tasse carnes insen cauma, harien nu sa tenna cenumnes mana martumne i oston. 

CHAPTER 4
But to Jonah that was extremely bad, and he was filled with wrath. 2 And he prayed to the Lord and said: “Alas, o Lord! Was this not what I said while I was in my country? Therefore I tried to run away to Tarshish in the beginning, for I knew that you are a Deity gracious and having mercy, slow to wrath and abundant in grace, and changing your mind about the bad thing. 3 And now I beg, o Lord: Take my life from me! For to me death is better than life.”
	4 But the Lord said: “Are you doing well by being wrathful?”
	5 Jonah went out from the city, and he sat to the city's east. There he made for himself a shelter, to sit under it until he would see what would happen to the city.

	6 Tá i Héru tyarne *lassarwa olva tule ama or Yóna, cárala laime caryan, etelehtien se urra sómallo sámo. Ar Yóna sáme túra alasse i olvanen.
	7 Mal i hilyala árasse Eru mentane vembe nastien i *lassarwa olva, ar hestanes. 8 Ar íre Anar oronte, Eru mentane urtala súre Rómello, ar Anar nastane Yóno cas, se-cárala milya. Ar arcanes quale, ar quentes: “Inyen qualme ná arya lá coivie!”
	9 Ar Eru quente Yónanna: “Ma cáral mai návenen rúşea pa i *lassarwa olva?” Ar quentes: “É cáran mai návenen rúsea, qualmenna!”
	10 Mal i Héru quente: “Elye same naire pa i *lassarwa olva, yen ual monte ar ye ual tyarne ale, ye oronte mi er lóme ar náne nancarna mi er lóme. 11 Tá ma inye ua lerta same naire pa Ninive, i haura osto, yasse ear queni or yunque lúr húmi quean i uar ista forya hyaryallo, ar yú rimbe celvali?”

	6 Then the Lord caused a leafy plant to come up over Jonah, making a shade for his head, to deliver him from his bad state of mind. And Jonah had great joy by the plant.
	7 But at the following dawn God sent a worm to sting the leafy plant, and it withered. 8 And when the sun arose, God sent a burning wind from the east, and the sun stung Jonah's head, making him weak. And he requested to die, and he said: “To me death is better than life!”
	9 But God said to Jonah: “Are you doing well by being wrathful about the leafy plant?” And he said: “Indeed I am doing well by being wrathful, until death!”
	10 But the Lord said: “You have grief about the leafy plant, for which you did not toil and which you did not cause to grow, that arose in one night and was undone in one night. 11 Then may I not have grief about Niniveh, the great city, in which there are over twelve times ten thousand people that do not know right from left, and also numerous animals?”



	

