Yestasse
Genesis



RANTA 1 
I yestasse Eru ontane menel cemenye. 2 Mal cemen náne cumna ar lusta, ar enge mornie or i undume, ono Eruo faire vílane or i neni.
	3 Ar eque Eru: “Cala na euva!” Ar enge cala. 4 Ar Eru cenne in i cala mára ná, ar Eru hyarne i cala i morniello. 5 Ar Eru estane i cala Aure, mal i mornie estanes Lóme. Ar enge şinye, ar enge arin, minya ré.
	6 Ar eque Eru: “Telluma na euva endesse i nenion, ar hyaruvas neni nenillon!” 7 Ar Eru carne i telluma, ar hyarnes i neni yar enger nu i telluma i nenillon yar enger or i telluma, ar enge sie. 8 Ar Eru estane i telluma Menel. Ar enge şinye, ar enge arin, tatya ré.

CHAPTER 1
In the beginning God created heaven and earth. 2 But earth was empty and void, and  was darkness over the abyss, but God's spirit was flying over the waters.
	3 And God said: “Let  be light!” And  was light. 4 And God saw that the light was  good, and God split the light from the darkness. 5 And God named the light Day, but the darkness he named Night. And  was evening, and  was morning, a first day.
	6 And God said: “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and it will split waters from waters!” 7 And God made the firmament, and he split the waters that were under the firmament from the waters that were over the firmament, and  was so. 8 And God named the firmament Heaven. And  was evening, and  was morning, a second day.

	9 Ar eque Eru: “I neni nu menel na ocomuvar erya nómesse, ar i parca nór na cénima!” Ar enge sie. 10 Ar Eru estane i parca nór Cemen, mal i ocómienwe neni estanes Ear. Ar Eru cenne i ta mára ná.
	11 Ar eque Eru: “Cemen na coluva salque, olvar carila erdi, yávealdar yavila yáve mi nostaleltar, cemende.” Ar enge sie. 12 Cemen colle salque, olvar carila erdi, mi nostaleltar, ar aldar yavila yáve yasse erdeltar ear, nostaleltassen. Ar Eru cenne i ta mára ná. 13 Ar enge şinye, ar enge arin, nelya ré. 

	9 And God said: “ the waters under heaven gather in a single place, and  the dry land be visible!” And  was so. 10 And God called the dry land Earth, but the waters having gathered he called Sea. And God saw that that was  good.
	11 And God said: “Let the earth bear grass, plants making seeds, fruit trees producing fruit within their kinds, on earth.” And  was so. 12 Earth bore grass, plants making seeds, within their kinds, and trees producing fruit in which their seeds are, within their kinds. And God saw that that was  good. 13 And  was evening, and  was morning, a third day.

	14 Ar eque Eru: “Calmar na euvar menelo tellumasse, hyarien aure lómello, ar nauvalte tanwar aşarion ar ríon ar coranárion! 15 Nauvalte calmar to menelo telluma, caltien cemenna!” Ar enge sie. 16 Eru carne i hoa calma atta – i anhoa calma turien auresse ar i ambe pitya calma turien lómisse – ar i eleni. 17 Ar Eru panyane tai to menelo telluma caltien cemenna 18 ar turien auresse ar lómisse ar hyarien cala morniello. Ar Eru cenne i ta mára ná. 19 Ar enge şinye, ar enge arin, cantea ré. 
	20 Ar eque Eru: “I neni na úmie umbainen coirie onnaiva, ar aiwi na viluvar or cemen to menelo telluma!” 21 Ar Eru ontane i hoe ulundi earo, ar ilye coirie onnar i carir i neni úmie ar levir mi tai, ar ilye rámavoiti aiwi mi nostaleltar. Ar Eru cenne i ta mára ná. 22 Ar Eru aistane te, quétala: “Yava ar ola rimbe, ar quata i neni i earessen, ar i aiwi na oluvar rimbe cemende.” 23 Ar enge şinye, ar enge arin, lempea ré. 

	14 And God said: “Let there be lamps on the firmament of heaven, to split day from night, and they will be signs of seasons  and of days and of years! 15 They will be lamps on the firmament of heaven, to shine upon earth!” And  was so. 16 God made the two great lights – the greatest light for ruling at day and the smaller light for ruling at night – and the stars. 17 And God put them on the firmament of heaven to shine upon earth 18 and for ruling at day and at night and for splitting light from darkness. And God saw that that was  good. 19 And  was evening, and  was morning, a fourth day.
	20 And God said: “The waters be swarming with swarms of living creatures, and  birds fly over earth on the firmament of heaven!” 21 And God created the great monsters of  sea, and all living creatures that make the waters swarming and move in them, and all winged birds within their kinds. And God saw that that was  good. 22 And God blessed them, saying: “Be fruitful and become numerous, and fill the waters in the seas, and  the birds become numerous on earth.” 23 And  was evening, and  was morning, a fifth day.

	24 Ar eque Eru: “Cemen na coluva cuine onnar mi nostaleltar, lamni ar hlicila onnar ar cemeo hravani, mi nostaleltar.” 25 Ar Eru carne cemeno hravani mi nostaleltar, ar i lamni mi nostaleltar ar ilye onnar i hlicir cemende mi nostaleltar. Ar Eru cenne i ta mára ná.

	24 And God said: “Let earth bear  living creatures within their kinds, beasts and creeping creatures and the beasts of earth, within their kinds. 25 And God made the beasts of earth within thir kinds, and the animals within their kinds and all creatures that creep on earth within their kinds. And God saw that that was  good.

	26 Ar eque Eru: “Alve care Atan emmalvasse, cantalvasse, ar turuvas earo lingwi ar menelo aiwi ar i lamni ar i quanda cemen ar ilye hlicila onnar i hlicir cemende.” 27 Ar Eru ontane Atan emmaryasse, mi Eruo emma ontanes hé, hanwa ar inya ontanes tú. 28 Ar Eru aistane tu, ar Eru quente túna: “Yava ar ola rimbe, ar quata cemen ar ása panya nu le, ar tura earo ingwi ar menelo aiwi ar ilya coirea onna ye hlice cemende.” 29 Ar eque Eru: “Yé, ánien lent ilya olva carila erdi i ea i quanda cemeno palúresse, ar ilya alda yavila yáve yasse erderya ea. Lent nauvas matta. 30 Ar ilya hravanen cemeno, ar ilya aiwen menelo, ar ilya onnan ye hlice cemende, in samir cuile intesse, ánien ilya laica olva ve matta.” Ar enge sie. 
	31 Ar Eru cenne ilqua ya carnelyanes, ar yé, anes ita mára. Ar enge şinye, ar enge arin, i enquea ré. 

	26 And God said: “Let us make Man in our image, in our form, and he will rule the fishes of the sea and the birds of the heavens and the entire earth and all creeping things that creep on earth.” 27 And God created Man in his image, in God's image he created him, male and female he created them . 28 And God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become numerous, and fill earth and subdue it , and rule over the fishes of the sea and the birds of heaven and every living creature that creeps on earth.” 29 And God said: “Behold, I have given you  every green plant making seeds that is on the surface of the entire earth, and every tree bearing fruit in which its seed is. For you it will be food. 30 And to every beast of earth, and to every bird of heaven, and to every creature that creeps on earth, to those that have life in themselves, I have given every green plant as food.” And it was so.
	31 And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And  was evening, and  was morning, the sixth day.

RANTA 2          
Sie menel cemenye ar quanda hossetta náner telyane. 2 Ar mí otsea ré Eru telyane carierya ya carnelyanes, ar séres mí otsea ré ilya carieryallo ya carnes. 3 Ar Eru aistane i otsea ré ar airitáne sa, an sasse Eru sére quanda carieryallo ya ontanelyanes ar carnelyanes.
	4 Si ná i nyarna pa menel cemenye íre anette ontaine, mí aure yasse i Héru Eru carne menel cemenye.
	5 En lá enge erya laique palúreo mi cemen, ar erya olva en ua tuianelyane, an i Héru Eru ua tyarnelyane ulo lanta cemenna, ar lá enge atan molien to i cén. 6 Mal híşie oronte cemello, ar antanes nén i quanda palúren cemeno. 7 Ar i Héru Eru carne i Atan astonen i cemello ar şúyane i şúle coiviéva mir nengwirya, ar i Atan olle coirea onna. 

CHAPTER 2
Thus heaven and earth and all their army were completed. 2 And on the seventh day God completed his work which he had done, and he rested on the seventh day from all his work that he did. 3 And God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it, for on it God rested from all his work that he had created and he had made.
	4 This is the story about heaven and hearth when they were being created, on the day when the Lórd God made heaven and earth.
	5 Still  was not a single herb of the ground on earth, and a single plant still had not sprouted, for the Lórd God had not caused rain to fall upon earth, and  was not  man to work on the soil. 6 But a mist arose from earth, and it gave water to the whole surface of earth.  7 And the Lórd God made the Man with dust from the earth and breathed the breath of life into his nose, and the Man became a living being.

	8 Ar i Héru Eru empanne tarwa mi Éren, Rómenna, ar tasse panyanes i Atan ye carnelyanes. 9 Ar i Héru Eru tyarne tuita cemello ilya alda i ná vanima nemestesse ar mára matien sello, ar yú i alda coiviéva i tarwa-endesse, ar i alda istyo máriéva ar ulcuva.
	10 Enge síre ya lende et Érenello antaven nén i tarwan, ar talo anes hyáraina mir celumi canta. 11 I esse i minyo ná Píhyon; sa ná i sire pelila i quanda Ħavíla·nóre, yasse ea malta. 12 Ar sana nóreo malta mára ná. Tasse ear yú níşima vihte ar nyelecca. 13 Ar i esse i tatya síreo ná Íhon; sa ná i sire pelila i quanda nóre Cús. 14 Ar i esse i nelya síreo ná Hindecel; sá ná ya cele Rómesse Assurello. Ar i cantea síre Perat ná.

	8 And the Lórd God planted a garden in Eden, towards  East, and there he placed the Man that he had made. 9 And the Lórd God caused to sprout from earth every tree that is beautiful in appearence and good for eating from it, and also the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
	10  was a river that went out of Eden to give water to the garden, and from there it was being split into four streams. 11 The name of the first one is Pishon; it is the river surrounding the entire land of Havilah, in which  is gold. 12 And the gold of that land is good. There are also fragrant gum and onyx. 13 And the name of the second river is Gihon; it is the river surrounding the entire land  Kush. 14 And the name of the third river is Hiddekel; it is  that runs to the east of Asshur. And the fourth river is Perath . 

	15 Ar i Héru Eru nampe i Atan ar panyane se Éreno tarwasse hepien sa ar tirien sa. 16 Ar i Héru Eru canne i Atanen, quétala: “Ilya aldallo i tarwasse lertal mate. 17 Mal i aldallo istyo máriéva ar ulcuva áva mate, an mí ré yasse matil sallo, tancave qualuval.”
	18 Ar eque i Héru Eru: “Ua mára in i Atan erinqua ná. Caruvan sen manyala quén ve isse.”
	19 I Héru Eru carne ho cemen ilye lamni palúreo ar ilye aiwi menelo, ar tulyanes te i Atanna cenien mana estumneset: Ya i Atan estane ilya cuina onna, sá nauvane esserya. 20 Ar i Atan estane ilye lamni ar i aiwi menelo ar ilye hravani celvar, mal Atanen uas hirne manyala quén ve isse.

	15 And the Lórd God took the Man and put him in the garden of Eden to keep  it and to guard it. 16 And the Lórd God commanded the Man, saying: “From every tree in the garden you may eat. 17 But from the tree of knowledge of good and evil do not eat, for in the day that you eat from it, you will certainly die.”
	18 And the Lórd God said: “It is not good that the Man is alone. I will make for him a helping person like himself.”
	19 The Lórd God made from earth all the animals of earth's surface  and all birds of heaven, and he led them to the Man to see what he was going to call them. What the Man called every living creature, that was going to be its name. 20 And the Man named all beasts and the birds  of heaven and all wild animals, but for Man he did not find a helping person like himself.

	21 Tá i Héru Eru tyarne núra húme lanta i Atanna, ar lan hé lorna né, nampes er i axoron ambostyasse ar quante hrávenen. 22 Ar i Héru Eru cante i axo ya nampes i Atano ambostello mir nís, ar se-tulyanes i Atanna. 23 Tá eque i Atan: “Lú sina nas axoli axonyaron ar hráve hrávenyo! Si nauva estaina Nís, an Nerello anes mapana."
	24 Etta nér autuva ataryallo ar amilleryallo ar himyuva verirya, ar nauvatte er hráve.
	25 Anette helde, i Atan yo verirya, mal únette nucumne.

	21 Then the Lórd God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the Man, and while he was asleep, he took one of the bones of his chest and filled  with flesh. 22 And the Lórd God formed the bone that he took from the Man's chest into a woman, and he brought her to the Man. 23 Then the Man said: “This time it is bones of my bones and flesh of my flesh! This one shall be called Woman, for from Man she was taken.”
	24 Therefore a man will go away from his father and from his mother and will stick to his wife, and they shall be one flesh.
	25 They were naked, the man and his wife, but they were not ashamed .

RANTA 3 
Mal i leuca náne finwa lá ilye hyane hravani cárine lo i Héru Eru, ar quentes i nissenna: “Lau Eru equétie in uaste lerta mate ilya aldallo i tarwasse?” 2 Ar quente i nís i leucanna: “I yáveo i aldaron i tarwasse lertamme mate. 3 Mal pa i yáve i aldo i tarwa-endesse, Eru equétie: Áva mate sello ar ávase appa, hya qualuvaste.” 4 Ono i leuca quente i nissenna: “Laume qualuvaste. 5 An Eru ista in i auresse ya matiste sello, hendustat nauvat pantane, ar oluvaste ve Eru, istala márie ar ulco.” 6 Ar i nís cenne in i alda náne mára pa matie sello ar fastala i hendun; é i alda náne írima, antala istya. Tá nampes yáveryo ar mante, ar antanes yú veruryan óse, ar hé mante.

CHAPTER 3
But the serpent was more cunning than all other beasts made by the Lórd God, and it said to the woman: “Surely God has not said that you  may not eat from every tree in the garden?” 2 And the woman said to the serpent: “Of the fruit of the trees in the garden we may eat. 3 But concerning the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden, God has said: Do not eat from it and do not touch it, or you shall die.” 4 But the serpent said to the woman: “By no means will you die. 5 For God knows that on the day that you eat from it, your eyes will be opened, and you will become like God, knowing good and evil.” 6 And the woman saw that the tree was good as concerns eating from it and pleasing to the eyes; indeed the tree was desirable, giving knowledge. Then she took of its fruit and ate, and she gave also to her husband with her, and he ate.

	7 Tá i hendu tuo yúyo nánet pantane, ar sintette i anette helde, ar tancette uo lasseli *relyáveo ar carnet intun collali. 8 Ar hlassette i Héru Aino óma lan vantanes i tarwesse mí vailima ranta i réo, ar Atan ar verirya nurtanettexet i Héru Ainollo imíca i aldar i tarwasse. 9 Ar i Héru Aino yáme i Atanna ar quente senna: “Masse nalye?” 10 Ar eques: “Ómalya hlassen i tarwasse, ar anen ruhtana, pan inye helda ná.” 11 Ar eques: “Man nyarne lyen in elye helda ná? Ma amátiel i aldallo pa ye cannen lyen, Áva mate sallo – ?” 12 Ar eque i Atan: “I nís ye antanel marien óni, sé nin-antane i aldallo, ar manten.” 13 Ar eque i Héru Eru i nissenna: “Mana si ya acáriel?” Ar eque i nís: “I leuca ni-şahtane, ar manten.”

	7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they fastened together some leaves of fig and made for themselves cloaks. 8 And they heard the Lórd God's voice while he walked in the garden in the windy part of the day, and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the Lórd God among the trees in the garden. 9 And the Lórd God cried to the Man and said to him: “Where are you?” 10 And he said: “Your voice I heard in the garden, and I was scared, since I am naked.” 11 And he said: “Who told you that you are naked? Have you eaten from the tree about which I commanded you, Do not eat from it – ?” 12 And the Man said: “The woman that you gave to dwell with me, she gave me  from the tree, and I ate.” 13 And the Lórd God said to the woman: “What is this you have done?” And the woman said: “The serpent induced me, and I ate.”

	14 Ar i Héru Eru quente i leucanna: “Pan si acáriel, elye nauva húna lá ilye coacelvar ar ilye hravani. Cumbalyasse menuval, ar asto matuval ter ilye rí coivielyo. 15 Ar panyuvan cotie imbe lye ar i nís, ar imbe erdelya ar erderya. Isse racuva carelya, ar elye racuva *taltellerya.”
	16 I nissenna quentes: “Olya aice napanin íre nalye as hína; aicesse coluval híni. Milmelya nauva verulyanna, ar isse lye-turuva.”
	17 Ar Atanna quentes: “Pan alastiel verilyo ómanna ar mante i aldallo pa ye cannen lyen: Áva mate sello, cemen nauva húna castalyanen. Aicesse ñetuval matsolya sallo ilye rí coivielyo. 18 Ar erci ar *nestalaimar coluvas lyen, ar matuval i resto olvar. 19 Mi timbarelyo *helmanier matuval massalya, tenna nanwenuval i cemenna, an sallo anel mapana.  An asto nalye, ar i astonna nanwenuval.”

	14 And the Lórd God said to the serpent: “Since you have done this, you shall be accursed more than all domestic animals and all beasts. On your stomach you will go, and dust you will eat through all the days of your life. 15 And I shall put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed. It shall crush your head, and you shall crush his heel.”
	16 To the woman he said: “Much pain I add when you are with child; in pain you shall bear children. Your longing shall be to your husband, and he will rule you.”
	17 And to Adam he said: “Since you have listened to your wife's voice and eaten from the tree of which I commanded you: Do not eat from it, earth shall be cursed by reason of you. In pain you shall get your food from it throgh all the days of your life. 18 And thorns and thistles will it bear to you, and you will eat the plants of the field. 19 In the sweat   of your face you will eat your bread, until you will return to the earth, for from it you were taken. For dust you are, and to dust you will return.”

	20 Ar Atan antane veriryan i esse Éva (Coivie), an hé olumne ilya coiviéno amil. 21 Mal i Héru Eru carne tun collar helmava ar tompe tu. 22 Ar i Héru quente: “Yé, Atan olólie ve er mici vi, istala márie ar ulco. Ar sí, pustien se rahtiello máryanen ar mapiello yú i Aldallo Coiviéva ar coitiello tennoio –” 23 Sie i Héru Eru mentane se oa Éreno tarwallo molien to i cemen yallo anes mapana. 24 Éles i Atan etsenna, ar Rómesse Érenello panyanes i cerúvi ar i uryala macil ya quere insa sir ar tar, varien i tie i Aldanna Coiviéva.

	20 And Adam gave his wife the name Eve (Life), for she was to become the mother of all life. 21 But the Lórd God made for them cloaks of skin and covered them. 22 And the Lórd said: “Behold, man has become like one among us, knowing good and evil. And now, to stop him from reaching out with his hand and from taking also from the Tree of Life and from living forever –” 23 Thus the Lórd God sent him away from the garden of Eden to work on the earth from which he was taken. 24 He drove the Man outside, and to the east of Eden he put the cherubs and the burning sword that turns itself hither and thither, to protect the way to the Tree of Life.

RANTA 4 
Ar Atan sinte Éva verirya, ar hé nostane ar colde Cain, quétala: “Acámien nér i Hérullo.” 2 Ar ata coldes – hánorya, Ável. Ar Ável olle mavar mámaron, mal Cain móle to i talan. 
	3 Ar apa lúme náne vanwa, Cain talle yáveli i talamello ve anna i Hérun. 4 Ar yú Avel talle anna, i minnónaron lamáreryo ar ho rantaltaron lárie. Ar i Héru cimne Ável ar annarya, 5 mal Cain ar annarya uas cimne. Ar Cain olle ita rúşea, ar cendelerya lantane. 6 Mal i Héru quente senna: “Manen ná i nalye rúşea, ar manen ná i cendelerya alantie? 7 Qui cáral ya mane ná, ma ual lerta orta hendulyat? Mal qui ual care ya mane ná, úcare nurtaxe ara i fenna, ar lyenna milmerya ná, mal elye turuva sa.”

CHAPTER 4
And Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bore Cain, saying: “I have received a man from the Lórd.” 2 And again she bore – his brother, Abel. And Abel became a shepherd of sheep, but Cain worked on the ground. 
	3 And after a time was passed, Cain brought some fruits from the ground as a gift to the Lórd. 4 And also Abel brought a gift, of the firstborn of his flock and from the fat of their pieces. And the Lórd heeded Abel and his gift, 5 but Cain and his gift he did not heed. And Cain became extremely angry, and his face fell. 6 But the Lórd said to him: “How is it that you are angry, and how is it that your face has fallen? 7 If you are doing what is good, may you not raise your eyes? But if you do not do what is good, sin hides itself by the door, and towards you its longing is, but you shall rule it.”

	8 Ar Cain carampe Ável hánoryanna. Ar túle lan anette i restasse i Cain oronte Ável hánoryanna ar nacante se. 9 Ar i Héru quente Cainenna: “Masse Ável hánolya?” Ar hé quente: “Uan ista. Ma inye hánonyo cundo ná?” 10 Mal quentes: “Mana acáriel? Hánolyo serceo óma yáma ninna i talamello. 11 Ar sí nalye húna i talamello ya latyane antorya camien hánolyo serce mályallo. 12 Íre molil to i talan, uas ambe antauva lyen poldorerya. Farino ar vantala nér nauval cemende.” 13 Ar Cain quente i Hérunna: “Paimenya ná túra lá ya polin cole! 14 Yé, síra élal ni oa cemeno palúrello, ar nauvan farino ar vantala nér cemende, ar tanca ná in aiquen ye ni-hiruva nahtuva ni!” 15 Mal i Héru quente senna: “Etta aiquen ye nahta Cain perperuva ahtar lúr otso.” Ar i Héru panyane tanwa Cainen, pustien aiquen hirila se nahtiello se. 16 Ar Cain lende oa i Hérullo ar marne mí Nóre Farinóva, Rómesse Erenello.

	8 And Cain spoke to Abel his brother. And it came  while they were in the field that Cain rose against Abel his brother and slew him. 9 And the Lórd said to Cain: “Where is Abel your brother?” And he said: “I do not know. Am I my brother's guardian?” 10 But he said: “What have you done? The voice of your brother's blood is crying to me from the ground. 11 And now you are cursed from the ground that opened its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand. 12 When you work on the ground, it will no more give you its strength. A fugitive and a wandering man you will be on earth.” 13 And Cain said to the Lórd: “My punishment is greater than I can bear! 14 Behold, today you are driving me away from the surface of the earth, and I will be a fugitive and a wandering man on earth, and  is certain that whoever will find me is going to slay me!” 15 But the Lórd said to him: “Therefore anyone who slays Cain will suffer revenge seven times.” And the Lórd set a sign for Cain, to stop anyone finding him from slaying him. 16 And Cain went away from the Lórd and dwelt in the Land of  Fugitive, to the east of Eden.

	17 Ar Cain sinte verirya, ar nostanes ar colde Ħanoc. Ar *yestanes carasta osto ar antane san i imya esse ve yondoryan: Ħanoc. 18 Ar Ħanocen náne nóna Íral, ar Íral óne Meħúyael, ar Meħúyael óne Metúhyael, ar Metúhyael óne Lámec. 19 Ar Lámec nampe insen veri atta; i minyo esse náne Ára ar i tatyo esse náne Silla. 20 Ar Ára colde Yával. Hé olle atar ion marir *lancoassen ar samir lamni. 21 Ar hánoryo esse náne Yúval. Isse olle atar illin i tyalir ñande ar simpe. 
	22 Ar yú Silla colde hína, Túval-cain, ye macane ilya tambina ar angaina tamma. Ar Túval-Caino néşa náne Naama. 
	23 Ar Lámec quente veriryannar: 
	“Ára ar Silla, hlara ómanya; veriryar Lámec, á lasta ya quétan; an anahtien nér pan harnanes ni, ar seldo pan pentes ni. 24 An qui Cainen nauva ahtarna lúr otso, tá Lámecen lúr otso *otoquean.”
	25 Ar Atan ata sinte verirya, ar coldes yondo ar antane sen i esse Sét (Panyana) – an “Eru apánie nin hyana erde Ávelo mende, pan Cain nacante se.”
	26 Ar yú Séten yondo náne cólina; ar antanes hén i esse Enos. Talume mo yalde i Héruo essenen mí minya lú.

	17 And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bore Hanoch. And he began to built a city and gave to it the same name as to his son: Hanoch. 18 And to Hanoch was born Irad, and Irad begat Mehujael, and Mehujael begat Methushael, and Methushael begat Lamech. 19 And Lamech took to himself two wives: the name of the first one was Adah and the name of the second one was Zilla. 20 And Adah bore Jabal. He became father of  who dwell in tents and have animals. 21 And his brother's name was Jubal. He became father of  that play  harp and  flute.
	22 And also Silla bore a child, Tubal-cain, who forged every tool of copper and of iron. And Tubal-cain's sister was Naama.
	23 And Lamech said to his wives: 
	“Adah and Zilla, hear my voice; wives of Lamech, listen to what I am saying; for I have slain a man since he wounded me, and a boy since he struck me. 24 For if Cain will be avenged seven times, then Lamech seventy-seven times.”
	25 And Adam again knew his wife, and she bore a son and gave to him the name Seth (Put-in-place) – for “God has set for me another seed in Abel's stead, since Cain slew him.”
	26 And also to Seth a son was born; and he gave him the name Enosh. At that time one called on the Lórd's name for the first time.

RANTA 5 
Sine nar Atano indyor. 
	Mí aure yasse Eru ontane Atan, mi Eruo emma carneses. 2 Hanu yo ní ontanes tu, ar aistanéset ar antane tun i esse Atani mí aure yasse anette ontane. 3 Ar Atan coine ter loar *nelequean ar tuxa. Tá ónes hína emmaryasse, cantaryasse, ar antanes hén i esse Sét. 4 Ar apa ónes Sét, réryar Atan náner an loar tuxar tolto, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 5 Sie ilye réryar Atan yassen coines náner loar *nelequean ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles.
	6 Ar Sét coine ter loar lempe ar tuxa; tá ónes Enos. 7 Ar apa ónes Enos, Sét coine ter an loar otso ar tuxar tolto, ár ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 8 Sie ilye réryar Sét yassen coines náner loar yunque ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles.

CHAPTER 5
These are Adam's descendants. 
	In the day in which God created Adam, he made him in God's image. 2 Male and female he created them , and he blessed them and gave them the name Men  in the day in which they were created. 3 And Adam lived for  one hundred and thirty years. Then he begat a child in his image, in his shape, and he gave to it the name Seth. 4 And after he begat Seth, the days of Adam were another eight hundred years, and he begat sons and daughters. 5 Thus all the days of Adam were nine hundred and thirty years. Then he died.
	6 And Seth lived for a hundred and five years; then he begat Enosh. 7 And after he begat Enosh, Seth lived for another eight hundred and seven years, and he begat sons and daughters. 8 Thus all the days of Seth in which he lived were nine hundred and twelve years. Then he died. 

	9 Ar Enos coine ter loar *neterquean; tá ónes Cénan. 10 Ar apa ónes Cénan, Enos coine ter an loar *lepenquean ar tuxar tolto, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 11 Sie ilye réryar Enos náner loar lempe ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles.  
	12 Ar Cénan coine ter loar *otoquean; tá ónes Mahalalel. 13 Ar apa ónes Mahalalel, Cénan coine ter an loar *canaquean ar tuxar tolto, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 14 Sie ilye réryar Cénan náner loar quean ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles.
	15 Ar Mahalalel coine ter loar lempe ar *enequean; tá ónes Yárel. 16 Ar apa ónes Yárel, Mahalalel coine ter an loar *nelequean ar tuxar tolto, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 17 Sie ilye réryar Mahalalel náner loar lempe ar *neterquean ar tuxar tolto. Tá qualles.

	9 And Enosh lived for ninety years; then he begat Kenan. 10 And after he begat Kenan, Enosh lived for another eight hundred and fifty years, and he begat sons and daughters. 11 Thus all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five years. Then he died.
	12 And Kenan lived for seventy years; then he begat Mahalalel. 13 And after he begat Mahalalel, Kenan lived for another eight hundred and forty years, and he begat sons and daughters. 14 Thus all the days of Kenan were nine hundred and ten years. Then he died.
	15 And Mahalalel lived for sixty-five years; then he begat Jared. 16 And after he begat Jared, Mahalalel lived for another eight hundred and thity years, and he begat sons and daughers. 17 Thus all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety-five years. Then he died.
 
	18 Ar Yárel coine ter loar atta ar *enenquan ar tuxa; tá ónes Ħanoc. 19 Ar apa ónes Ħanoc, Yárel coine ter an loar tuxar tolto, ar ónes yondoli are selyeli. 20 Sie ilye réryar Yárel náner loar atta ar *enenquean ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles.
	21 Ar Ħanoc coine ter loar lempe ar *enenquean; tá ónes Metúhyelaħ. 22 Ar apa ónes Metúhyelaħ, Ħanoc vantane as Eru ter an loar tuxar nelde, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 23 Sie ilye réryar Ħanoc náner loar lempe ar *enenquean ar tuxar nelde. 24 Ar Ħanoc vantane as Eru. Tá anes vanwa, an Eru nampe se.
	25 Ar Metúhyelaħ coine ter loar otso ar *toloquean ar tuxa; tá ónes Lámec. 26 Ar apa ónes Lámec,  Metúhyelaħ coine ter an loar atta ar *toloquean ar tuxar otso, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 27 Sie ilye réryar Metúhyelaħ náner nerte ar *enequean ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles. 

	18 And Jared lived for a hundred and sixty and two years; then he begat Hanoch . 19 And after he begat Hanoch, Jared lived for another eight hundred years, and he begat sons and daughters. 20 Thus all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years. Then he died.
	21 And Hanoch lived for sixty-five years; then he begat Methushelah. 22 And after he begat Methushelah, Hanoch walked with God for another three hundred years, and he begat sons and daughters. 23 Thus all the days of Hanoch were three hundred and sixty-five years. 24 And Hanoch walked with God. Then he was gone, for God took him.
	25 And Methushelah lived for one hundred and eighty-seven years; then he begat Lamech. 26 And after he begat Lamech, Methushelah lived for another seven hundred and eighty-two years, and he begat sons and daughters. 27 Thus all the days of Methushelah were nine hundred and sixty-nine years. Then he died.

	28 Ar Lámec coine ter loar atta ar *toloquean ar tuxa, ar ónes yondo. 29 Ar antanes sen i esse Noaħ, quétala: “Isse vi-tiutauva molielvasse ar málvato mótiesse i cemello ya i Héru uhútie.” 30 Ar apa ónes Noaħ, Lámec coine ter an loar lempe ar *neterquean ar tuxar lempe, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 31 Sie ilye réryar Lámec náner loar otso ar *otoquean ar tuxar otso. Tá qualles.
	32 Ar Noaħ coine tenna sámes loar tuxar lempe. Tá ónes Hyém, Ħám ar Yáfet.

	28 And Lamech lived for a hundred and eighty and two years, and he begat a son. 29 And he gave him the name Noah, saying: “He will comfort us in our work and in the toil of our hands from  the earth that the Lórd has cursed.” 30 And after he begat Noah, Lamech lived for another five hundred and ninety-five years, and he begat sons and daughters. 31 Thus all the days of Lamech were seven hundred and seventy-seven years. Then he died.
	32 And Noah lived until he had  five hundred years. Then he begat Shem, Ham and Japheth.

RANTA 6 
Ar túle, íre Atani *yestaner ole rimbe to cemeno palúre, ar selyeli náner nóne tien, 2 in Eruo yondor cenner Atanion selyer, in anelte vanime, ar nampelte inten verili imíca illi i cildelte. 3 Ar eque i Héru: “Fairenya ua maruva Atande tennoio, pan náse yú hráve, mal réryar nauvar loar *yúquean ar tuxa.”
	4 I norşar enger cemende mi ente rí, ar yú epeta, íre Eruo yondor túler Atanion selyennar ar coldelte híni tien; té náner i nerdor i enger mi enwine rí, i neri esseva.
	5 Ar Eru cenne in Atanion ulco náne túra cemende, ar in ilya inca sanwion endalto náne rie ulca mí quanda aure. 6 Ar i Héru merne i lá carnelyanes atan cemende, ar anes quanta naireo mi endarya. 7 Ar eque i Héru: “*Aupsaruvan atan ye ontanen ho cemeno palúre, é atan ar laman ar hlicila onnar ar menelo aiwi véla, an merin in uan carne te.” 8 Mal Noaħ hirne lisse mí Héruo hendu.
	9 Si ná i nyarna Noaħo. Noaħ náne faila nér; ilvana anes imíca i queni lúmeryo. Noaħ vantane as Eru. 10 Ar Noaħ óne yondor nelde: Hyém, Ħám ar Yáfet. 

CHAPTER 6
And  came , when Men began to become numerous on the surface of earth, and daughters were born to them, 2 that God's sons saw the daughters of Men, that they are beautiful, and they took for themselves wives among all that they chose. 3 And the Lórd said: “My spirit shall not dwell in Man forever, since he is also flesh, but his days shall be one hundred and twenty years.”
	4 The giants were on earth in those days, and also thereafter, when God's sons came to the daughters of men and they bore children to them; they were the mighty men that were in ancient days, the men of name .
	5 And God saw that Men's evil was great in earth, and that every idea of the thoughts of their heart was only evil all day long . 6 And the Lórd wished that he had not created man on earth, and he was full of grief in his heart. 7 And the Lórd said: “I will erase  man that I created from the surface of earth, indeed man and animal and creeping creatures and the birds of heaven alike, for I wish that I did not  make them.” But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lórd.
	9 This is the story of Noah. Noah was a righteous man; perfect he was among the people of his time. Noah walked with God. 10 And Noah begat three sons: Shem, Ham and Japheth. 

	11 Mal cemen náne hastaina epe Eru, ar cemen olle quanta ormeo. 12 Ar Eru yente cemen, ar yé! anes hastana, an ilya hráve hastanelyane tierya cemende. 13 Ar Eru quente Noaħenna: “Telin metya ilya hráve, an cemen anaie quátina ormeo ténen. Ar yé! nancaruvan té ar cemen véla. 14 Cara lyen marcirya ófer-toava. Şambi cara i marciryasse, ar ása tope i mityasse ar i etsesse *himmanen. 15 Ar sie alye care sa: I marcirya nauva rangar *lepenquan ar tuxa anda, rangar lempe *yúquean palla, ar rangar lepenque halla. 16 Tópa alye care i marciryan, ar ása telya perta rango ama, ar i marciryo fenna á panya etseryasse. Alye cara sa arwa minya, tatya ar nelya talamo. 17 Ar pa inye – yé, talanye i oloire, neni or cemen, nancarien nu menello ilya hráve yasse i şúle coiviéva ea. Illi i ear cemende effíruvar. 18 Mal tulcuvan vérenya aselye, ar tuluval mir i marcirya, elye ar yondolyar ar verilya a yondoverilyar aselye. 19 Ar ho ilye coirie onnar ilya hráveo alye tala atta ilya nostaleo mir i marcirya, hepien te coirie aselye. Hanu yo ní nauvalte.  20 Ho ilya nostaleo aiwi, ar ho ilya nostaleo lamni, ar ho ilya nostaleo hlicila onnar, atta tuluvat lyenna, hepien te coirie. 21 Ar elye, á mapa lyen ilya matto ya mo mate, ar ása comya lyenna, ar nauvas elyen ar tien matta.” 22 Ar Noaħ carne sie. Ilqua ya i Eru cannelyane sen, ta carnes.

	11 But earth was being marred before God, and earth became full of violence. 12 And God looked at earth, and behold! it was marred, for all flesh had marred its way on earth. 13 And God said to Noah: “I intend to put an end to all flesh, for earth has been filled with violence by them. And behold! I will destroy them and earth alike. 14 Make for yourself an ark of gopher wood. Rooms  make in the ark, and cover it on the interior and on the outside with pitch. 15 And thus you are to make it: The ark will be a hundred and fifty yards long, twenty-five yards wide, and fifteen yards high . 16 A roof you are to make for the ark, and complete it half a yard upwards, and the door of the ark place on its side. You are to make it having a first, a second and a third floor. 17 And as for myself – behold, I bring the flood, waters over earth, to destroy from under heaven all flesh in which the sprit of life is. All that are on earth will expire. 18 But I will establish my covenant with you, and you will come into the ark, you and your sons and your wife and your son-wives with you. 19 And from all living creatures of all flesh you are to bring two of every kind into the ark, to keep them alive with you. Male and female they will be. 20 From every kind of bird, and from every kind of animals, and from every kind of creeping creatures, two will come  to you, to keep them  alive. 21 And you, take for yourself of all food that one eats, and gather it to you, and it will be food for you and for them.” 22 And Noah did so. Everything that the Lórd had commanded him, that he did.

RANTA 7 
Ar i Héru quente Noaħenna: “Mena mir i marcirya, elye ar quanda nosselya. An lyé ecénien faila opo ni *nónare sinasse. 2 Ilya poica celvo alye mapa otso ar otso, i hanu as nírya, ar i celvaron i uar poice, atta, i hanu as nírya, 3 yú i aiwion menelo, otso ar otso, hanur ar nír, hepien erdelta coirea mi quanda palúre cemeno. 4 An íre an rí otso avánier, inye tyaruva ulo lanta cemenna ter auri *canaquean ar lómi *canaquean, ar *aupsaruvan ho i palúre ilya eala onna ye acárien.” 5 Ar Noaħ carne ilqua ya i Héru cannelyane sen. 6 Ar Noaħ sáme loar tuxar enque íre i oloire túle – neni untúpala cemen. 
	7 Ar Noaħ lende mir i marcirya as yondoryar ar verirya ar yondoveriryar, nó i oloireo neni túler. 8 I poice celvaron, ar i celvaron i uar poice, ar i aiwion, ar ilye onnaron i hlicir i talamesse, 9 atta ar atta lendet Noaħenna mir i marcirya, hanu yo ní, ve Eru cannelyane Noaħen. 10 Ar martane in apa rí otso i oloireo neni túler cemenna. 

CHAPTER 7
And the Lórd said to Noah: “Go into the ark, you and your entire house. For you I have seen just before me in this generation. 2 Of every pure animal you are to take seven and seven, the male with its female, and of the beasts that are not pure, two, the male with its female, 3 also of the birds of heaven, seven and seven, males and females, to keep their seed alive on the entire face of the earth. 4 For when another seven days have passed, I will cause rain to fall on earth through forty days and forty nights, and I will wipe out from the surface every existing creature that I have made.” 5 And Noah did everything that the Lórd had commanded him. 6 And Noah had  six hundred years when the flood came – waters covering earth.
	7 And Noah went into the ark with his sons and his wife and his son-wives, before the waters of the flood came. 8 Of the pure animals, and of the animals that are not pure, and of the birds, and of all creatures that creep on the ground, 9 two and two went to Noah into the ark, male and female, as God had commanded Noah. 10 And it happened that after seven days the waters of the flood came upon earth.

	11 I loasse tuxar enquea coiviéno Noaħo, i attea astasse, mí *otoquea ré i asto – ré yanasse ilye i ehteler i undumeo náner rácine pante, ar menelo lattini náner pantane. 12 Ar i ulo ulle undu cemenna ter auri *canaquean ar lómi canaquean. 
	13 Mi sana imya ré lendelte mir i marcirya, Noaħ ar Hyém ar Ħám ar Yáfet, Noaħo yondor, ar verirya Noaħ ar yondoveriryar nelde óse, 14 té ar ilya nostaleo hravan, ar ilye nostaleron lamni, ar ilya nostaleo hlicila onna ye hlice cemende, ar ilya nostaleo vilila onna – ilya aiwe, ilya rámavoite onna. 15 Ar lendelte Noaħenna mir i marcirya, atta ar atta ilya hráveo yasse i şúle coiviéno enge. 16 Ar i túler náner hanwa ar inya ilya hráveo. É túlelte, ve Eru cannelyane sen. Tá i Héru holtane ca se. 

	11 In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the seveteenth day of the month – on that day all the fountains of the abyss were broken open, and the windows of heaven were opened. 12 And the rain poured down upon earth for  forty days and forty nights.
	13 On that same day they went into the ark, Noah and Shem and Japheth, Noah's sons, and Noah's wife and his three son-wives with him, 14 they and every kind of beast, and animals of all kinds, and every kind of creeping creature that creeps on earth, and every kind of flying creatures – every bird, every winged creature. 15 And they went to Noah into the ark, two and two over all flesh in which the breath of life existed. 16 And  that came were male and female of all flesh. Indeed they came, as God had commanded him. Then the Lórd shut  behind him.

	17 Ar i oloire enge rí *canaquean cemende, ar i neni oronter ar ortaner i marcirya, ar lutunes ama cemello. 18 Ar i neni turuner ar untúpaner cemen úvesse, mal i marcirya lutune i nenion palmesse. 19 Ar i neni ita turuner cemende, ar ilye orwe oronti nu quanda menel náner tópine. 20 *Perrangar lepenque ama i neni turuner, ar i oronti náner tópine.
	21 Tá effirne ilya hráve ya léve cemende, aiwe ar laman ar hravan véla, ar ilye atani. 22 Illi i sámer i şúle coiviéva nengwiltasse, illi i enger to i parca nór, qualler. 23 Ar *aupsarnes ilya onna ye enge i quanda palúresse, atan ar laman ar hlicila onna ar menelo aiwe véla. É anelte *aupsárine cemello, ar rie Noaħ ar i enger óse i marciryasse lemner. 24 Ar i neni turner cemende ter rí *canaquean. 

	17 And the flood was forty days on earth, and the waters rose and lifted the ark, and it floated up from earth. 18 And the waters conquered and covered earth in abundance, but the ark floated on the surface of the earth. 19 And the waters very much took over  earth, and all high mountains under  entire heaven were covered. 20 Fifteen cubits upwards the waters took over, and the mountains were covered.
	21 Then expired all flesh that moved on earth, bird and animal and beast alike, and all humans. 22 All that had the spirit of life in their nose, all that existed on the dry land, died. 23 And he wiped away every creature that existed in the entire bosom of earth, man and animal and creeping creature and bird of heaven alike. Indeed they were wiped away from earth, and only Noah and those that were with him in the ark remained. 24 And the waters ruled on earth for forty days.

RANTA 8 
Ar Eru enyalde Noaħ ar ilye hravani ar ilye lamni i náner óse i marciryasse, ar Eru tyarne súre lahta olla cemen, ar i neni lantaner. 2 I ehteler i undumeo ar i lattini menelo náner holtane, ar i ulo menello pustane. 3 Ar i neni oi nanwénaner to cemello, ar apa rí *lepenquean ar tuxa i neni pícaner.
	4 Ar i marcirya serune i otsea astasse, mí *otoquea ré i asto, to i oronti Araráto. 5 Ar i neni oi lantaner tenna i quainea asta. I quainea astasse, mí minya ré i asto, i orotingar oller cénime. 
	6 Ar túle, íre rí *canaquean náner vanwe, i Noaħ pantane i lattin i marciryo ya carnelyanes. 7 Ar mentanes etsenna i corco, ar lendes sir ar tar tenna i neni náner vanwe cemello ar anes ata parca. 

CHAPTER 8
And God recalled Noah and all beasts and all animals that were with him in the ark, and God caused a wind to pass over earth, and the waters fell. 2 The fountains of the abyss and the windos of heaven were shut, and the rain from heaven ceased. 3 And the waters were ever returning from on earth, and after a hundred and fifty days the waters were lessening. 
	4 And the ark came to rest in the seventh month, in the seventeenth day of the month, on the mountains of Ararat. 5 And the waters ever fell until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the mountain-tops became visible.
	6 And  came , when forty days were gone, that Noah opened the window of the ark that he had made. 7 And he sent outside the raven , and it went hither and thither until the waters were gone from earth and it was again dry.

	8 Ar etementanes sello cucua, cenien qui i neni náner vanwe i talamo palúrello. 9 Mal i cucua ua hirne nóme serien talyan, ar nanwennes Noaħenna i marciryasse, an i neni enger i palúresse quanda cemeno. Ar eterahtanes máryanen ar nampe se ar talle se insenna, mir i marcirya. 10 Ar hompes an rí otso, ar ata mentanes i cucua et i marciryallo. 11 Ar i cucua túle senna lúmesse şinyeo, ar yé! enge mi antorya virya lasse *milpialdallo. Tá Noaħ sinte in i neni oantelyaner cemello. 12 Ar lemnes an rí otso, ar mentanes i cucua etsenna, mal hé ua ambe nanwenne senna.
	13 Ar túle mí loa mine ar *tuxea enque, i minya auresse mí asta, in i neni náner vanwe to cemello. Ar Noaħ nampe oa i marciryo tópa, ar yentes, ar yé! i talameo palúre náne ú neno. 14 Ar i attea astasse, mí otso ar *yúquainea ré i asto, cemen náne parca. 

	8 And he sent forth from himself a dove, to see if the waters were gone from the surface of the ground. 9 But the dove did not find a place to rest for its foot, and it returned to Noah in the ark, for the waters were on the surface of all the earth. And he reached out with his hand and took it and brought it to himself, into the ark. 10 And he waited another seven days, and again he sent the dove out of the ark. 11 And the dove came to him at the time of evening, and behold!  was in its mouth a fresh leaf from an olive tree. Then Noah knew that the waters had gone away from earth. 12 And he tarried seven more days, and he sent the dove outside, but it did no more return to him.
	13 And  came  in the six hundred and first year, on the first day in the month, that the waters were gone from on earth. And Noah took away the roof of the ark, and he looked, and behold! the ground of the bosom of earth  was without water. 14 And in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, earth was dry.

	15 Ar Eru carampe Noaħenna, quétala: 16 “Mena et i marciryallo, elye ar verilya ar yondolyar ar yondoverilyar aselye! 17 Ilye coirear i ear aselye, ilya hráveo mici aiwi ar lamni ar ilye onnar i hlicir cemende, áte tala etsenna as elye. Ar nauvalte úvie cemende. É yava ar ola rimbe cemende!”

	15 And God spoke to Noah, saying: 16 “Go out of the ark, yourself and your wife and your sons and your son-wives with you! 17 All living ones that are with you, of all flesh among birds and animals and all creatures that creep on earth, bring them outside with yourself. And they shall be abundant on earth. Indeed bear fruit and become numerous on earth!”

	18 Ar  Noaħ etelende, ar yondoryar ar verirya ar yondoveriryar óse. 19 Ilya hravan, ilya hlicila onna ar ilya aiwe, ilqua ye leve cemende mi nostaleltar, lender et i marciryallo. 20 Ar Noaħ carastane *yangwa i Hérun, ar nampes ilya poica celvo ar ilya poica aiweo, ar talle urtaine *yancali i *yangwasse. 21 Ar i Héru nusse i níşima ne, ar i Héru quente endaryasse: “Uan ata hútuva i talan castanen atano, an atano endo nauşe ná ulca néşeryallo, ar uan ata petuva ilya coivie ve acárien. 22 Ter ilye cemeno rí rerie yo yávie, ar ringie yo laucie, ar laire yo hríve, ar aure yo lóme, uar pustuva.”

	18 And Noah went out, and his sons and his wife and his son-wives with him. 19 Every beast, every creeping creature and every bird, everything that moves on earth in  their kinds, went out of the ark. 20 And Noah built an altar to the Lórd, and he took of every pure animal and of every pure bird, and brought burnt offerings on the altar. 21 And the Lórd smelt the pleasant smell, and the Lórd said in his heart: “I shall not again curse the ground by reason of man, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth, and I shall not again smite all life as I have done. 22 Through all the days of earth sowing and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease.”

RANTA 9 
Ar Eru aistane Noaħ ar yondoryar, ar quentes téna: “Yava ar ola rimbe, ar quata cemen. 2 Ar i rucie lello ar i caure ya tyarilde caituvat ilya hravanna cemeno ar ilya aiwenna menelo ar ilyannar i nar úmie to i talan ar ilye lingwinnar earo; máldanna anaielte antane. 3 Ilya levila nat ye coita nauva matta len. Ve antanen len i laice laiqui ánien len ilqua. 4 Rie hráve as cuilerya – sercerya – ávalde mate. 5 Ar rie i serce cuileldo canuvan nan. Ho má ilya hravano canuvanyes nan, ar ho má atano – ho i má queno ye toronya ná – canuvan nan atano cuile. 6 Ye et-ulya atano serce, lo atan sercerya nauva et-ulyaina, an Eru ontane Atan emmaryasse. 7 Mal elde, yava ar ola rimbe! Ola úmie cemende ar rimbe tasse!”

CHAPTER 9
And God blessed Noah and his sons, and he said to them: “Bear fruit and become numerous, and fill earth. 2 And the fear of you and the fright that you cause shall lie upon every beast of earth and upon every bird of heaven and upon all that are abundant on the ground and upon all fishes of  sea; into your hand they have been given. 3 Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you. Like I gave you the green plants I have given you everything. 4 Only flesh with its life – its blood – you are not to eat. 5 And only the blood of your life  I shall demand back. From the hand of every beast I shall demand it back, and from the hand of man – from the hand of a person who is his brother – I shall demand back a man's life. 6  who pours out a man's blood, by man his blood will be poured out, for God created Man in his image. 7 But you, be fruitful and become many! Become abundant on earth and numerous there!”

	8 Ar Eru quente Noaħenna ar yondoryannar óse: “Pa inye – yé, tulcan vérenya aselde ar as erdelda apa le, 10 ar as ilya coirea onna ye ea aselde, mici aiwi ar lamni ar cemeno hravani aselde – mici illi i ettulir i marciryallo, é ilya cuile cemeno. 11 Ar tulcuvan vérenya aselde, ar ilya hráve ua ata nauva aucirna i neninen oloireo, ar lá euva ata oloire nancarien cemen.” 12 Ar Eru quente: “Si ná i tanwa i véreo ya inye care imbi ni ar lé ar ilya coirea onna ye ná aselde, ilye *nónarin yar tuluvar: 13 Helyanwenya apánien i lumbusse, ar nauvas tanwa i véreo imbe ni ar cemen. 14 Ar tuluva, íre talanye lumbur or cemenna, ar i helwanye ná cénina i lumbusse, 15 in enyaluvan vérenya ya ea imbi inye ar elde ar ilya coivea onna, ar i neni uar ata oluva oloire nancarien ilya hráve. 16 Ar i helyanwe euva i lumbusse, ar cenuvanyes, enyalienyan i oira vére imbe Eru ar ilya coirea onna ilya hráveo ya ea cemende.” 17 Ar Eru quente Noaħenna: “Si ná i tanwa i véreo ya utulcien imbe ní ar ilya hráve ya ea cemende.” 

	8 And God said to Noah and to his sons with him: “As for me – behold, I establish my covenant with you and with your seed after you, 10 and with every living creature that is with you, among birds and animals and beasts of earth with you – among all that come out from the ark, indeed every life of earth. 11 And I shall establish my covenant with you, and all fless will not again be cut off by the waters of a flood, and there will not again be a flood to destroy the earth.” 12 And God said: “This is the sign of the covenant that I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all generations that shall come: 13 My rainbow I have placed in the cloud, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and earth. 14 And  shall come , when I bring clouds over earth, and the rainbow is seen in the cloud, 15 that I will recall my covenant which is between me and you and every living creature, and the waters will not again become a flood to detroy all flesh. 16 And the rainbow will be in the cloud, and I will see it, for me to recall the eternal covenant between God and every living creature which is on earth.” 17 And God said to Noah: “This is the sign of the covenant that I have established between me and all flesh that is on earth.”

	18 Ar Noaħo yondor i lender et i marciryallo náner Hyém, Ħám ar Yáfet, ar Ħám ná i atar Canáano. 19 Sine nelde náner Noaħo yondor, ar ilye Atani cemende nar indyoltar.
	20 Ar Noaħ olle nér i talamo, ar empannes tarwa liantassion. 21 Ar sunces i limpeo ar olle *limpunqua, ar nampes oa larmaryar ar náne helda *lancoaryasse. 22 Ar Ħám, i atar Canáano, cenne atarya helda, ar nyarnes hánorya attan i etsesse. 23 Ar Hyém ar Yáfet nampet larma, ar panyanettes to almottat, ar mittanette as pontitta ompa, ar tompette ataretto helda hroa lan cendeletta náne querna oa. Sie uatte cenne ataretta helda. 

	18 And Noah's sons that went out from the ark were Shem, Ham and Japheth, and Ham i sthe father of of Canaan. 19 These three were Noah's sons, and all Men on earth are their descendants.
	20 And Noah became a man of the ground, and he planted a garden of vines. 21 And he drank of the wine and became drunk, and he took off his garments and was naked in his tent. 22 And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his father naked, and he told his two brothers on the outside. 22 And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and they put it on their shoulders, and they entered with their back forward, and they covered their father's naked body while their face was turned away. Thus they did not see their father naked.

	24 Ar Noaħ etecuinune limperyallo, ar sintes ya amnessa yondorya carnelyane sen. 25 Ar eques: “Húna na Canáan! Mól mi mólion nauvas hánoryain!” 26 Tá eques: “Aistana na i Héru, Hyémo Aino! Nai Canáan nauva sen mól! 27 Nai Eru antauva Yáfeten yonda nóme, ar maruvas *lancoassen Hyémeva, ar nai Canáan nauva sen mól!”
	28 Ar apa i oloire Noaħ coine ter an loar *lepenquean ar tuxar nelde. 29 Sie ilye réryar Noaħ náner loar *lepenquean ar tuxar nerte. Tá qualles.

	24 And Noah awoke from his wine, and he knew what his youngest son had done to him. 25 And he said: “Cursed be Canaan! Thrall of thralls he will be to his brothers!” 26 Then he said: “Blessed is the Lórd, Shem's God! May Canaan be a thrall to him! 27 May God give to Japheth broad space, and he will dwell in the tents of Shem, and may Canaan be to him a thrall!” 
	28 And after the flood Noah lived for a further three hundred and fifty years. 29 Thus all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years. Then he died.

RANTA 10 
Ar sine nar i ontanar yondoron Noaħo, Hyém, Ħám ar Yáfet, íre yondoli náner nóne tien apa i oloire. 
	2 Yondoryar Yáfet náner Omer ar Máho ar Marai ar Yávan ar Tuval ar Mehyec ar Tíras. 3 Ar yondoryar Omer náner Ascenas ar Rífat ar Toharma. 4 Ar yondoryar Yávan náner Elíhya ar Tarsis. Cittim ar Loranim. 5 Ho té i nórion falassi náner hyárine mir nórieltar, ilquen lamberyanen –  nosseltainen, nóreltassen.

CHAPTER 10
And these are the ones begotten of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham and Japheth, when sons were born to them after the flood.
	2 The sons of Japheth were Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan and Tubal and Meshek and Tiras. 3 And the sons of Gomer were Ashkenaz and Riphath ar Togarma. 4 And the sons of Javan were Elisha and Tarshish, Kittim and Dodanim. 5 From them the shores of the nations were split into their countries, everyone by his tongue – by their families, in their nations.

6 Ar yondoryar Ħám náner Cús ar Misraïm ar Pút ar Canáan. 7 Ar yondoryar Cús náner Seva ar   Ħavíla ar Savta ar Raama ar Savteca. Ar yondoryar Raama náner Hyeva ar Leran.
	8 Ar Cús óne Nimrol. Sé náne i minya ye olle taura cemende. 9 Anes taura *farando opo i Héru. Etta mo quete: “Ve Nimrol, taura *farando opo i Héru.” 10 Ar i yesta aranieryo náne Vável ar Erec ar Accar ar Calne Sínar·nóresse. 11 Et sana nórello lendes Assurenna ar carastane Ninive ar Reħovot-Ir ar Calaħ 12 ar Resen imbe Ninive ar Calaħ. Ta i hoa osto ná. 
	13 Ar Misraïm óne Lúrim ar Anamim ar Lehavim ar Naftuħim 14 ar Patrusim ar Casluħim – illon i Filistyar etelender – ar Caftorim. 15 Ar Canáan óne Síron minnónarya, ar Ħét, 16 ar i Yevusyar ar i Amoryar ar i Iryasyar 17 ar i Hivyar ar i Arcyar ar i Sínyar 18 ar i Arvalyar ar i Semaryar ar i Hamatyar. Ar epeta i Canáanyaron nossi vintaner. 19 Sie i Canáanyaron réna menne ho Síron ana Erar tenna Asa, ar ana Sorom ar Omorra ar Arma ar Sevoïm, tenna Láhya. 20 Sine náner Ħámo indyor, nosseltainen, lambeltainen, ménaltassen, nóreltassen.

6 And the sons of Ham were Kush and Mizraim and Put and Canaan. 7 And the sons of Cush were Seba and Havilah and Sabtah and Raamah and Sabteka, and the sons of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan. 
	8 And Cush begat Nimrod. He was the first who became mighty on earth. 9 He was a mighty hunter before the Lórd. Therefore one says: “Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the Lórd.” 10 And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh in the land of Shinar. 11 Out of that land he went to Asshur and built Niniveh and  Rehoboth-Ir and Calah 12 and Resen between Niniveh and Calah. That is the great city.
	13 And Mizraim begat Ludim and Anamim and Lehabim and Naphtuhim 14 and Patrusim and Casluhim – from whom the Philistines went forth – and Caphthorim. 15 And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, 16 and the Jebusites and the Amorites and the Girgashites 17 and the Hivites and the Arkites and the Sinites 18 and the Arvadites and the Zemarites and the Hamathites. And thereafter the families  of the Canaanites scattered. 19 Thus the border of the Canaanites went from Zidon towards Gerar as far as Gaza, and towards Sodom and Gomorra and Admah and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha. 20 These were Ham's descendants, by their families, by their tongues, in their regions, in their nations. 

	21 Ar yú Hyémen hínali náner nóne. Náse i atar ilye yondoron Évero, ar Yáfet i amyáro háno. 22 Yondoryar Hyém náner Élam ar Assur ar Arpaxar ar Lúr ar Aram. 23 Ar yondoryar Aram náner Ús ar Ħúl ar Eter ar Mas. 24 Ar Arpaxar óne Hyelaħ, ar Hyelaħ óne Éver. 25 Ar Éveren yondo atta nánet nóne. I minyo esse náne Pele (Hyarie), an mi réryar cemen náne hyárina, ar hánoryo esse náne Yoctan. 26 Ar Yoctan óne Almoral ar Hyelef ar Hasarmávet ar Yeraħ 27 ar Haróram ar Úsal ar  Licla 28 ar Óval ar Avimáel ar Hyeva 29 ar Ófir ar Ħavíla ar Yóvav. Ilye sine náner Yoctano yondor. 30 Ar vehtelta náne ho Mehya ana Sefar, tenna i oron Rómeno.
	31 Sine nar indyoryar Hyém, ontaleltanen, lambeltainen, ménaltassen, nóreltassen. 
	32 Sine nar i nossi yondoron Noaħo, ontaleltanen, nóreltassen, ar ho sine i nóri náner hyárine cemende apa i oloire. 
	
	21 And also to Shem children were born. He is the father of all the sons of Eber, and the brother of Japheth the eldest. 22 The sons of Shem were Elam and Asshur and Arpachshad and Lud and Aram. 23 And the sons of Aram were Uz and Hul and Gether and Mash. 24 And Arpachshad begat Shelach, and Shelach begat Eber. 25 And to Eber two sons were born. The first one's name was Peleg (Splitting), for in his days earth was split, and his brother's name was Joktan. 26 And Joktan begat Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and Jerah 27 and Hadoram and Uzal and Dikla 28 and Obal and Abimael and Sheba 29 and Ophir and Havilah and Jobab. All these were Joktan's sons. 30 And their area of dwelling  was from Mesha towards Sephar, as far as the mountain of the East.
	31 These were the descendants of Shem, by their descent, by their tongues, in their regions, in their nations.
	32 These are the families of the sons of Noah, by their descent, in their nations, and from them the nations were split on earth after the flood. 

RANTA 11 
Ar i quanda cemen sáme er lambe ar i imye quettar. 2 Ar túle, íre lendelte Rómello, in Atani hirner yonde Sínar·nóresse ar marner tasse. 2 Ar quentelte imíca inte: “Tula, alve care telari ar alve urta tai mai!” Ar *yuhtanelte telari ve sarni ar *morihimma ve *telarhimma.
	4 Ar quentelte: “Tula, alve carasta inwen osto ar mindon arwa telmaryo menelde, ar alve care inwen esse, lá olien vintane ter cemen.” 

CHAPTER 11
And all the earth had one language and the same words. 2 And it came , when they went from the east, that Men found a broad valley in the land of Shinar and dwelt there. 2 And they said among themselves: “Come, let us make bricks and let us burn them well!” And they used bricks as stones  and bitumen as mortar.
	4 And they said: “Come, let us build for ourselves a city and a tower having its top in heaven, and let us make for ourselves a name, so as not to become scattered through earth.

	5 Mal i Héru ununte cenien i osto ar i mindon yar Atani carastaner. 6 Ar eque i Héru: “Yé, nalte er lie, ar illi mici te samir er lambe, ar si ná i minya nat ya cáralte. Sí munta ya merilte care nauva tien úcárima. 7 Tula, alve unta ar care lambelta rúcina, pustien quén haniello i lambe exeo.” 8 Sie i Héru te-vintane talo i quanda palúrenna cemeno, ar pustanelte carasta i osto. 9 Etta mo antane san i esse Vável (Rúcinie), an tasse i Héru carne rúcine i quanda cemeno lambi, ar talo te-vintanes i quanda palúrenna cemeno.

	5 But the Lórd went down to see the city and the tower that Men built. 6 And the Lórd said: “Behold, they are one people, and all among them have one language, and this is the first thing that they are doing. Now nothing that they desire to do will be impossible for them. 7 Come, let us go down and make their language confused, to stop one from understanding the language of another.” 8 Thus the Lórd scattered them from there to the entire surface of earth, and they stopped building the city. 9 Therefore one gave it the name Babel (Confusion), for there the Lórd made confused the tongues of the entire earth, and from there he scattered them upon the entire surface of earth.

	10 Sine nar Hyémo indyor: Íre Hyém sáme loar tuxa ónes Arpaxar, loa atta apa i oloire. 11 Ar apa Hyém óne Arpaxar, coines ter an loar tuxar lempe, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 
	12 Ar Arpaxar coine ter loar lempe ar *nelequean; tá ónes Hyelaħ. 13 Ar apa ónes Hyelaħ, Arpaxar coine ter an loar nelde ar tuxar canta, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli. 
	14 Ar Hyelaħ coine ter loar *nelequean; tá ónes Éver. 15 Ar apa ónes Éver, Hyelaħ coine ter an loar nelde ar tuxar canta, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli.
	16 Ar Éver coine ter loar canta ar *nelequean; tá ónes Pele. 17 Ar apa ónes Pele, Éver coine ter an loar *nelequean ar tuxar canta, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli.

	10 These are Shem's descendants: When Shem had  a hundred years he begat Arphaxad. 11 And after Shem begat Arphaxad, he lived for another five hundred years, and he begat sons and daughters.
	12 And Arphaxad lived for five hundred and thirty years; then he begat Shelah. 13 And after he begat Shelah, Arphaxad lived for another four hundred and three years, and he begat sons and daughters.
	14 And Shelah lived for thirty years; then he begat Eber. 15 And after he begat Eber, Shelah lived four hundred and three years and had sons and daughters.
	16 And Eber lived for thirty-four years; then he begat Peleg. 17 And after he begat Peleg, Eber lived for another four hundred and thirty years, and he begat sons and daughters.

	18 Ar Pele coine ter loar *nelequean; tá ónes Rëu. 19 Ar apa ónes Rëu, Pele coine ter loar nerte ar tuxa atta, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli.
	20 Ar Rëu coine ter loar atta ar *nelequean; tá ónes Seru. 21 Ar apa ónes Seru, Rëu coine ter loar otso ar tuxar atta, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli.
	22 Ar Seru coine ter loar *nelequean; tá ónes Náħor. 23 Ar apa ónes Náħor, Seru coine ter loar tuxa atta, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli.
	24 Ar Náħor coine ter loar nerte ar *yúquean; tá ónes Teraħ. 25 Ar apa ónes Teraħ, Náħor coine ter loar neterque ar tuxa, ar ónes yondoli ar selyeli.
	26 Ar Teraħ coine ter loar *otoquean; tá ónes Avram, Náħor ar Háran. 

	18 And Peleg lived for thirty years; then he begat Reu. 19 And after he begat Reu, Peleg lives for two hundred and nine years, and he begat sons and daughters.
	20 And Reu lives for thirty-two years; then he begat Serug. 21 And after he begat Serug, Reu lived for another two hundred and seven years, and he begat sons and daughters. 
	22 And Serug lived for thirty years; then he begat Nahor. 23 And after he begat Nahor, Serug lived for two hundred years, and he begat sons and daughters.
	24 And Nahor lived for twenty-nine years; then he begat Terah. 25 And after he begat Terah, Nahor lived for one hundred and nineteen years, and he begat sons and daughters.
	26 And Terah lived for seventy years; then he begat Abram, Nabor and Haran.

	27 Ar sine nar Teraħo ontier: Teraħ óne Avram, Náħor ar Háran, ar Háran óne Lót. 28 Lan Teraħ atarya en náne coirea, Háran qualle mí nóre yasse anes nóna, mi Úr i Caldearon. 29 Ar Avram ar Náħor namper intun veri; Avramo verio esse náne Sarai, ar Náħoro verio esse náne Milca, selyerya Háran, i atar Milco ar Isco véla. 30 Mal Sarai ua polde nosta; pennes hína. 31 Ar Teraħ nampe Avram yondorya, ar Lót yondorya Háran, yondoryo yondo, ar Sarai yondoryo veri, ar lendelte aselte ho Úr Caldeaeron, menien Canáan·nórenna. Ar túlelte Ħáranenna ar marner tasse. 32 Ar réryar Teraħ náner loar lempe ar tuxa atta. Tá Teraħ qualle mi Ħáran.

	27 And these are Terah's begettings: Terah begat Abram, Nahor and Haran, and Haran begat Lot. 28 While Terah his father was still alive, Haran died in the land where he was born, in Ur of the Chadeans. 29 And Abram and Nahor took to themselves wives; Abram's wife's name was Sarai, and Nahor's wife's name was Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and Iscah alike. 30 But Sarai  could not conceive; she lacked  child. 31 And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai his son's wife, and they went with them from Ur of the Chaldeans, to go to the land of Canaan. And they came to Haran and dwelt there. 32 And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years. Then Terah died in Haran.

RANTA 12 
Ar i Héru quente Avramenna: “Á lenweta nórelyallo ar lielyallo ar atarelyo nossello, i nórenna ya   tanuvan lyen. 2 Ar lye-caruvan túra nóre, ar aistuvan lye, ar caruvan esselya túra. Alye na aistie! 3 Ar aistuvan i aistar lye, ar ye húta lye hútuvan, ar lyénen ilye nossi palúreo nauvar aistane.” 
	4 Ar Avram lende, ve i Héru quentelyane senna, ar Lót lende óse. Ar Avram sáme loar lempe ar *otoquean íre lenwentes Ħáranello. 5 Ar Avram talle Sárai verirya ar Lót hánoryo yondo, ar ilye armaltar yar ñentelyanelte, ar i queni i oller núroltar mi Ħáran, ar etelendelte Canáan·nórenna.      
	Íre túlelte mir Canáan·nóre, 6 Avram lende ter i nóre Hyecem·nómenna, i nordonna Moreo. Ar i Canáanyar enger tá i nóresse. 7 Ar i Héru tanne inse Avramen, ar quentes: “Erdelyan antauvan nóre sina.” Ar hé carastane tasse *yangwa i Hérun ye tannelyane inse hén.

CHAPTER 12
And the Lórd said to Abram: “Depart from your land and from your people and from your father's kin, to the land that I shall show you. 2 And I shall make you great there, and I shall bless you, and I shall make your name great. You be a blessing! 3 And I shall bless those that bless you, and  who curses you I shall curse, and by you all families in the bosom of earth  shall be blessed.”
	4 And Abram went, as the Lórd had said to him, and Lot went with him. And Abrahm had  of five and seventy yars when he departed from Haran. 5 And Abram brought Sarai his wife and Lot his brother's son, and all their goods that they had obtained, and the people that became their servants in Haran, and they went forth to the land of Canaan.
	When they came into the land of Canaan, 6 Abram went through the land to the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. 7 And the Lórd showed himself to Abram, and he said: “To your seed I shall give this land.” And he built there an altar to the Lórd that had shown himself to him.

	8 Ar oantes talo i orontenna mi Rómen ho Vet-Él, ar ortanes *lancoarya imbe Vet-Él mi Númen ar Ai mi Rómen, ar carastanes tasse *yangwa i Hérun, ar yaldes i Héruo essenen. 9 Ar Avram lende nómello nómenna, ana Nehev. 
	10 Ar enge saicele i nóresse, ar Avram ununte mir Mirrandor marien tasse, an i saicele hranga né mí nóre. 11 Ar túle in íre ron menumnes mir Mirrandor, quentes Sárai veriryanna: “Yé, mecin! Istan i natye nís vanima nemesteo. Ar tuluva in íre i Mirrar cenuvar tye, quetuvalte: Nís sina verirya ná. Tá nahtuvalte ni, mal tyen lavuvalte coita. 13 Queta, mecin, i natye néşanya! Sie samuvan márie castatyanen, ar hepuvan coivienya tyénen.”

	8 And he went away from there to the mountain in the East from Bethel, and he erected his tent between Bethel in the west and Ai in the east, and he built there an altar to the Lórd, and he called upon the name of the Lórd. 9 And Abram went from place to place, towards Negev. 
	10 And  was a famine in the land, and Abram went down into Egypt to dwell there, for the famine was hard in the land. 11 And it came  that when soon he would go into Egypt, he said to Sarai his wife: “Look, please! I know that you are a woman of beautiful appearance. And it will come  that when the Egyptians will see you, they will say: This woman is his wife. Then they will slay me, but you they will let live. 13 Say, please, that you are my sister! Thus I will fare well  by reason of you, and I will keep my life by means of you.”

	14 Ar martane, íre Avram náne tulinwa mir Mirrandor, in i Mirrar cenner i nís ar túner in anes ita vanima. 15 Ar condoryar Fáro cenner se ar laitaner se opo Fáro, ar i nís náne talana coaryanna Fáro. 16 Ar Avramen carnes mai castanen Sáraio, ar ñentes mámar ar mondor ar *pellopor, hanwe ar inye núror, ar *pellopi, ar ulumpi. 17 Mal i Héru pente Fáro ar nosserya túre tarambolínen castanen Saraio, Avramo veri. 18 Ar Fáro yalde Avram, ar quentes: “Mana si ya acáriel nin? Mana castalya lá nyarien nin i náse verilya? 19 Manen ná i quentel i náse néşalya, tyarila ni mapa se nin ve veri? Ar sí, sisse ná verilya. Áse mapa ar mena!” 20 Ar Fáro canne nellin pa se, ar mentaneltes oa, sé ar verirya ar ilqua ya sámes.

	14 And  happened, when Abram was come into Egypt, that the Egyptians saw the woman and perceived that she was very beautiful. 15 And the princes of Pharaoh saw her and praised her before Pharaoh, and the woman was brought to the house of Pharaoh. 16 And to Abram he did well by reason of Sarai, and he got sheep and oxen and he-asses, male and female servants, and she-asses, and camels. 17 But the Lórd struck Pharaoh and his family with great blows by reason of Sarai, Abram's wife. 18 And Pharaoh summoned Abram, and he said: “What is this that you have done to me? What is your reason for not telling me that she is your sister? 19 How is  that you said that she is your sister, causing me to take her to myself as wife? And now, here is your wife. Take he and go!” 20 And Pharaoh commanded some men  regarding him, and they sent him away, him and his wife and everything that he had.

RANTA 13 
Ar Avram lende ama et Mirrandorello, isse ar verirya ar ilqua ya sámes, ar Lót lende óse, mir Nehev. 2 Ar Avram náne ita lára lamnion, telpeo ar malto. 3 Ar lendes lendaryassen Nehevello tenna Vet-El, tenna i nóme yasse *lancoarya enge i yestasse, imbe Vet-El ar Ai. 4 Túles i nómenna yasse enge i *yangwa ya carnelyanes tasse i yestasse, ar Avram yalde tasse i Héruo essenen. 
	5 Ar yú Lót, ye lende as Avram, sáme mámar ar lamni ar *lancoar. 6 Ar i nóre ua polde colitat, mariettan uo. An armattar náner rimbe, ar ua ence tun mare uo. 7 Ar cos oronte imbi i mavari i tirner celvaryar Avram ar i mavari i tirner celvaryar Lót. Ar i Canáanyar ar i Perisyar máraner tá i nóresse. 

CHAPTER 13
And Abram went up from Egypt, he and his wife and all that he had, and Lot went with him, into Negev. 2 And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver and in gold. 3 And he went on his journeys from Negev as far as Bethel, as far as the place where his tent was in the beginning, between Bethel and Ai. 4 He came to the place where the altar was that he had made there in the beginning, and Abram called there on the Lórd's name.
	5 And also Lot, who travelled with Abram, had sheep and cattle and tents. 6 And the land could not bear them , for them to dwell together. And their gods were numerous, and it was not possible for them to dwell together. 7 And strife arose between the shepherds that wached Abram's animals and the shepherds that watched Lot's animals. And the Canaanites and the Perizites were then dwelling in the land.

	8 Ar Avram quente Lótenna: “Nai lá euva cos imbe ni ar tye, ar imbi mavarinyar ar mavarityar, an nangwe torni. 9 Ma i quanda nóre ua opo tye? Hyara intye nillo. Qui lelyatye hyaryanna menuvan foryanna, ar qui lelyatye foryanna menuvan hyaryanna.” 10 Ar Lót ortane henduryat ar yente i quanda nanda ara Yordan, in i quanda ména sáme úve nenwa. Talume – nó i Héru nancarne Sorom yo Omorra – anes ve i Héruo tarwa, ve Mirrandor, tenna Soar. 11 Etta Lót cilde insen i quanda nanda ara Yordan, ar Lót menne Rómenna, ar hyarnettexet quén i exello. 12 Avram marne Canáan·nóresse, mal Lót marne i ostossen mí Nanda ar ortane *lancoarya ara Sorom. 13 Mal Soromo neri náner ulce ar túre úcarindor i Hérunna.

	8 And Abram said to Lot: “May there not be strife between me and you, and between my shepherds and your shepherds, for we are brethren. 9 Is not the entire land before you? Separate yourself your me. If you travel to the left I shall go to the right, and if you travel to the right I shall go to the left.” 10 And Lot raised his eyes and beheld the whole vale of the Jordan, that the entire region had an abundance of water. At that time – before the Lórd destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah – it was like the garden of the Lórd, like Egypt, as far as Zoar. 11 Therefore Lot chose for himself the entire vale of the Jordan, and Lot went eastward, and they  separated themselves one from the other. 12 Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, but Lot dwelt in the cities in the Vale and erected his tent by Sodom. 13 But the men of Sodom were evil and great sinners against the Lórd.

	14 Ar i Héru quente Avramenna, apa Lót náne hyárina sello: “Á orta hendulyat, ar alye yéta i nómello yasse nalye Formenna ar Hyarmenna ar Rómenna ar Númenna! 15 An i quanda nóre ya cénal, elyen antauvanyes, ar erdelyan – tennoio. 16 Ar caruvan erdelya ve cemeno asto. Sie, qui quén ista note cemeno asto, tá yú erdelya nauva nótina. 17 Á orta, a lelya ter i nóre, ve anda ar ve palla nás! An elyen antauvanyes.”
	18 Ar Avram léve *lancoaryasse, ar túles ar marnes ara i nornor Mamreo, i nar mi Ħevron, ar carastanes tasse *yangwa i Hérun. 

	14 And the Lórd said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him: “Lift your eyes, and you look from the land where you are northwards and southwards and eastwards and westwards! 15 For the entire land that you are seeing, to you I shall give it, and to your seed – forever. 16 And I shall make your seed like the dust of earth. Thus, if a person knows how to count the dust of earth, then your seed shall also be counted. 17 Rise, travel through the land, as long and as wide it is. For to you I shall give it.”
	18 And Abram moved in his tent, and he came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, that are in Hebron, and he built there an altar to the Lórd.

RANTA 14 
Ar túle mi réryar Amrafel aran Sínaro, Aryoc aran Ellesáro, Celorlaómer aran Elamo ar Tiral aran Oiyimo, 2 in ohtacarnelte ana Vera aran Soromo, ar ana Virhya aran Omorro, Sínav aran Armo, Hyemever aran Sevoímo, ar i aran Velo – ta ná, Soaro. 3 Ilye sine túler ve erya hosse i Sindim-nandenna, yasse i Singwa Ailin caita sí. 4 Loar yunque mólelyanelte ve núror Celorlaómeren, mal i nelequea loasse amorontelte. 5 Ar i *canaquea loasse túler Celorlaómer ar i arani i náner óse, ar turunelte i Refaiyar mi Ahyterot-Carnaïm, ar i Súsyar mi Hám ar i Emyar mi Hyave-Ciryataïm 6 ar i Ħoryar mi orontelta Sëir, tenna El-Páran, ya caita ara i ravanda. 7 Ar querneltexer nan ar túler ana En-Mispat – ta ná, Cáres – ar turunelte i nórie Amelacityaron, ar yú i Amoryar i marner mi Ħasason-Támar. 

CHAPTER 14
And  came  in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellesar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam and Tidal king of Goiim, 2 that they made war against Bera king of Sodom, and against Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela – that is, of Zoar. 3 All these came like a single army to the Siddim valley, where the Salty Sea lies now. 4 Twelve years they had worked as servants for Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they rose up. 5 And in the forteenth year  came Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him, and they conquered the Rephaites in Ashteroth-Karnaim, and the Zuzites in Ham and the Emites in Shaveh-Kiriathaim, 6 and the Horites in their hilly region Seir, as far as El-Paran, which lies by the wildernes. 7 And they turned themselves back and came against En-Mishpat – that is, Kadesh – and concquered the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazazon-Tamar.

	8 Tá etelender aran Soromo ar aran Omorro ar aran Armo ar aran Sevoímo, ar aran Velo – ta ná, Soaro – ar manwaner inte mahtien ana te i Sindim-nandesse, 9 ana Celorlaómer aran Elamo ar Tiral aran Oiyimo ar Amrafel aran Sínaro ar Aryoc aran Ellasáro: arani canta ana i lempe. 10 Mal i Sindin-nande náne quanta sapsaron *himmava, ar íre arani Soromo ar Omorro úşaner lantanelte mina tai, ar i lemner úşer i orontenna. 11 Ar ñottoltar namper ilye i armar mi Sorom yo Omorra, ar ilya mattalta, ar oanter. 12 Nampelte yú Lót, Avramo háno yondo, ar lender oa. Isse tá márane Soromesse.

	8 Then went forth the king of Sodom and the king of Gomorra and the king of Admah and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Belah – that is, of Zoar – and they prepared themselves to fight against them in the Siddim valley, 9 against Chedorlaomer king of Elam and Tidal king of Goiim and Amraphel king of Shinar and Arioch king of Ellasar: four kings against the five. 10 But the Siddim valley was full of pits of asphalt, and when the kings of Sodom and Gomorra where flying they fell into them, and  that remained fled to the mountain. 11 And their enemies took all the goods in Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food, and went away. 12 They took also Lot, Abram's brother's son, and went off. He was then dwelling in Sodom.

	13 Ar quén ye úşelyane túle ar nyarne Avram Heveryan. Isse tá márane ara i nornor Mamre  Amoryava, Escolo háno ar Anero háno. Sámelte vére as Avram. 
	14 Ar íre Avram hlasse i tornerya náne tulyana oa, ettulyanes peantane neryar, toloquean ar tuxar nelde, ar roitane tenna Lán.
	15 Ar hyarnes neryar ana te lómisse, isse ar núroryar, ar penteset. Tá te-roitanes tenna Ħóva, ya ná Formesse Lamascusello. 16 Ar talles nan ilye i armar, ar yú Lót tornerya talles nan, ar yú i nissi ar i queni. 17 Ar Soromo aran etelende velien se, apa entulesserya nahtiello Celorlaómer ar i arani i náner óse, i Hyáve-nandesse – ta ná, i Arannande. 18 Ar Melciserec, aran Sálemo, ettalle massa ar limpe. Isse náne *airimo Eru Antaro. 19 Ar aistanéses ar quente: “Na aistana Avram lo Eru Antara, ye carne menel cemenye, 20 ar na aistana Eru Antara, ye ánie ñottolyar mir málya!” Ar Avram antane sen quaista ho ilqua. 

	13 And one who had fled came and told Abram  Hebrew. He was then dwelling by the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, Eshkol's brother and Aner's brother. They had a covenant with Abram.
	14 And when Abram heard that his brother  was led away, he led forth his trained men, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued as far as Dan.	
	15 And he divided his men against them at night, he and his servants, and he struck them. Then he pursued them as far as Hobah, which is north of Damascus. 16 And he brought back all the goods, and also Lot his brother he brought back, and also the women and the people. 17 And the king of Sodom came forth to meet him, after his return from slaying Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him, in the vale of Shaveh – that is, the King's Vale. 18 And Melkisedek, king of Salem, brought bread and wine. He was priest of God Most High. 19 And he blessed him and said: “Blessed be Abram by God Most High, who made heaven and earth, 20 and blessed be God Most High, who has given your enemies into your hand!” And Abram gave him a tenth of everything.

	21 Ar Soromo aran quente Avramenna: “Ánin anta i queni, mal i armar lertal mapa elyen!” 22 Ono Avram quente Soromo aranna: “Ortan mánya i Hérunna, Eru Antaranna ye carne menel cemenye: 23 Qui nás rie lanya hya latta hyapan, en mapuvan munta ho ilqua ya samil, pustien lye quetiello: Inye carne Avram lára. 24 Munta inyen! Rie ya i nesse neri amátier, ar i masse i nerion i lender óni, Áner, Escol ar Mamre – lava tien mapa masselta.”

	21 And Sodom's king said to Abram: “Give me the persons, but the goods you may take for yourself!” 22 But Abram said to the king of Sodom: “I raise my hand to the Lórd, to God the Highest who made menel and heaven: 23 If it is only a thread or a strap for a shoe, still I will take nothing from everything that you have, to stop you from saying: I made Abram rich. 24 Nothing for me! Only what the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men that went with me, Aner, Eshcol and Mamre – let them take their portion.”

RANTA 15 
Apa nati sine i Héruo quetta túle Avramenna mi maur, quétala: “Áva ruce, Avram! Inye turmalya; *paityalelya nauva ita túra!” 2 Ar eque Avram: “A Hér Héru, mana antauval nin? An inye auta silo pen hína, ar ye haryuva coanya nauva Eliéser Lamascusello.” 3 Avram yú quente: “Yé, inyen ual ánie erde, ar yé, quén nóna coanyasse nauva aryoninya.” 4 Mal yé, i Héruo quetta túle senna, quetila: “Nér sina ua nauva aryonelya. An ye tuluva et hirdilyar, isse nauva aryonelya.” 5 Ar talleses etsenna, ar quentes: “Á yéta menelenna ar nota i tinwi, qui ece lyen notitat!” Yú quentes henna: “Sie nauva erdelya.” 6 Ar hé sáve i Héruo quetie, ar nontes sa hén ve failie. 7 Ar quentes henna: “Inye i Héru ye talle lye et Úrello i Caldearon, antaven lyen nóre sina harielyan sa ve aryon.” 

CHAPTER 15
After these things the Lórd's word came to Abram in a vision, saying: “Do not fear, Abram! I  your shield; your reward shall be extremely great!” 2 And Abram said: “O Lord Lórd , what will you give me? For I go way hence without child, and  who will possess my house will be Eliezer from Damascus. 3 Abram also said: “Behold, me you have not given  seed, and behold, a person born in my house will be my heir.” 4 But behold, the word of the Lórd came to him, saying: “This man will not be your heir. For  who shall come out of your entrails, he shall be your heir.” 5 And he brought him outside, and he said: “Look at the heavens and count the stars, if it is possible for you to count them!” He also said to him: “So will your seed be.” 6 And he believed the saying of the Lórd, and He counted that to him as righteousness. 7 And he said to him: “I am the Lórd who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give you this land for you to possess it as heir.”

	8 Mal quentes: “A Hér Héru, manen istan i haryuvanyes ve aryon?” 9 Tá hé quente senna: “Ánin mapa yaxe arwa loaron nelde, ar nyéni arwa loaron nelde, ar camo arwa loaron nelde, ar *cucuolle ar nessa cucua.” 10 Ar nampes té illi, ar peryanéset i endesse, ar panyanes ilya perina ranta ara i hyana, mal i aiwi uas peryane. 11 Ar i farie aiwi ununter i qualine hroannar, mal Avram éle te oa. 
	12 Ar túle, Anaro nútiesse, i tumna húme lantane Avramenna. Ar yé, rucie, é túra mornie, lanteáne senna. 13 Ar quentes Avramenna: “Á ista in erdelya maruva ve aianor nóresse ya ua véralta, ar nauvalte móli i quenin tasse, ar tyaruvaltet moia ter loar tuxar canta. 14 Mal yú i nóre yan nauvalte móli inye namuva, ar epeta ettuluvalte arwe rimbe armalion. 15 Mal elye menuva atarilyannar rainesse; nauval talana sapsalyanna mára yáriesse. 16 Ar i cantea *nónaresse nanwenuvalte sir, an Amoryaron úcare en lá utúlie quanta lestaryanna.”

	8 But he said: “O Lord Lórd , how do I know that I shall possess it as heir?” 9 Then he said to him: “Take to me a cow three years old, and a she-goat three years old, and a ram three years old, and a turtle dove and a young dove.” 10 And he took them all, and he divided them in half at the middle, and he put every halved part next to the other, but the birds he did not divide in half. 11 And the birds of prey came down upon the dead bodies, but Abram drove them away.
	12 And it came , at the setting of the sun, that a deep sleep fell upon Abram. And beyond, fear, indeed a great darkness, was falling upon him. 13 And He said said to Abram: “Know that your seed shall dwell as foreigners in a land that is not their own, and they shall be slaves to the people there, and they will cause them to be afflicted for  four hundred years. 14 But also the nation for whom they will be slaves I shall judge, and thereafter they shall go forth having many goods. 15 But you shall go to your fathers in peace; you shall be brought to your grave in a good age. 16 And in the fourth generation they shall return hither, for the sin of  Amorites still has not come to its full measure.”

	17 Ar íre Anar nunte, ar tumna mornie lantane, túler urna yallo usque oronte ar uryala runda ya lahtane imbi rantar sine. 18 Mi yana ré i Héru tulcane vére as Avram, quétala: “Erdelyan antan nóre sina, Mirrandoro sírello i hoa sírenna, i Perat-síre: 19 i nóre i Cenyaron ar i Cenisyaron ar i Carmonyaron 20 ar i Ħetyaron ar i Perisyaron ar i Refaíaron 21 ar i Amoryaron ar Canáanyaron ar i Iryasyaron ar i Yevusyaron.”

	17 And when the Sun set, and deep darkness fell,  came an oven from which a reek went up and a burning torch which passed between these pieces. 18 In that day the Lórd established a covenant with Abram, saying: “To your seed I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates river: 19 the land of the Kenites and the Kenizzites and the Kadmonites 20 and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Rephaites 21 and the Amorites and the Canaanites and the Girgashites and the Jebusites.

RANTA 16 
Sárai, Avramo veri, ua coldelyane sen hína. Mal enge óse inya mól, Mirra nís yeo esse náne Háhar. 2 Ar Sarai quente Avramenna: “Yé, mecin! I Héru ni-upustie coliello híni. Mecin, á mitta mólinyanna! Cé ñetuvan hína issenen.” Ar Avram lastane Sáraio óma. 3 Sie Sárai, Avramo veri, nampe Háhar mólya ar antane se Avram veruryan náven verirya. 4 Ar mittanes Háharenna, ar hé nostane. 
	Mal íre Háhar túne i nostanelyanes, uas ambe sáme áya heriryan. 5 Ar Sárai quente Avramenna: “Atyárietye i úfailie ya perpéran. Antanen mólinya mir súmatya, ar íre cennes i nostanelyanes, uas ambe sáme áya nin. Nai i Héru namuva imbe ni ar tye.” 6 Mal Avram quente Sáraienna: “Yé, móletya mátyasse ná; cara sen ya mára ná mi hendutyat.” Ar Sarai náne naraca hén, ar hé úşe oa sello.

CHAPTER 16
Sarai, Abram's wife, had not born to him  child. But  was with her a female slave, an Egyptian woman whose name was Hagar. 2 And Sarai said to Abram: “Behold, please! The Lórd has stopped me from bearing children. Please, go in to my slave! Perhaps I will get a child by her.” And Abram listened to Sarai's voice. 3 Thus Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar her slave and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife. 4 And he went in to Hagar, and she conceived. 
	But when Hagar perceived that she had conceived, she did not more have awe for her mistress. 5 And Sarai said to Abram: “You have caused the injustice that I am suffering. I gave my slave into your bosom, and when she saw that she had conceived, she did not more have  awe for me. May the Lórd judge between me and you.” 6 But Abram said to Sarai: “Behold, your slave is in your hand; do to her what is good in your eyes.” And Sarai was harsh to her, and she fled away from her.

	7 Ar i Héruo vala hirne se ara ehtele nenwa i ravandasse, ara i ehtele i tiesse Hyúrenna. 8 Ar quentes: “Háhar Sáraio mól, mallo utúliel ar manna ménal?” Ar hé quente: “Úşan Sárai herinyallo.” 9 Ar i Héruo vala quente senna: “Nanwena herilyanna, ar nucuma imle nu máryat.” 10 Ente, i Héruo vala quente senna: “Caruvan erdelya ita rimba, ar nauvas únótima liyúmeryanen.” 11 Ar i Héruo vala quente: “Yé, nalye as hína, ar coluval yondo. Ar antauval sen i esse Ismael (Eru Hlare), an i Héru ahlárie manen moianel. 12 Ar nauvas atan ve hráva *pellopo; márya nauva ana ilquen, ar ilqueno má ana sé. Ar opo ilye torniryar maruvas.” 

	7 And the Lórd's angel found her by a spring of water in the wilderness, by the spring on the way to Shur. 8 And he said: “Hagar Sarai's slave, from where have you come and to where are you going?” And she said: “I am fleeing from Sarai my mistress.” 9 And the Lórd's angel said to her: “Return to your mistress, and humble yourself under her hands.” 10 Furthermore, the Lórd's angel said to her: “I will make your seed extremely numerous, and it will be uncountable by its multitude.” 11 And the Lórd's angel said: “Behild, you are with child, and you will bear a son. And you shall give to him the name Ishmael (God Hears), for the Lórd has heard how you were afflicted. 12 And he will be a man like a wild donkey; his hand will be against everyone, and everyone's hand against him. And before all his brothers he shall dwell.”

	13 Ar Háhar antane esse i Hérun ye quétane senna: “Elye ná Eru ye cene.” An quentes: “Ma sisse yando ecénien sé ye cene ni?” 14 Etta i tampo ná estaina Vëer-Laħai-Röi (Tampo i Coireáva ye Cene Ni). Caitas imbe Cares ar Verel. 
	15 Ar Háhar colde Avramen yondo, ar Avram antane yondoryan, ye Háhar colde, i esse Ismael. 16 Ar Avram sáme loar enque ar *toloquean íre Háhar colde Ismael Avramen.

	13 And Hagar gave a name to the Lórd that was speaking to her: “You are God who sees.” For she said: “Have I here even seen him who sees me?” 14 Therefore the well is called Beer-Lahai-Roi (Well of the Living One who Sees Me). It lies between Cadesh and Bered.
	15 And Hagar bore to Abram a son, and Abram gave to his son, whom Hagar bore, the name Ishmael. 16 And Abram had  six and eigthy years when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram. 

RANTA 17 
Ar íre Avram sáme loar nerte ar *neterquean, i Héru tannexe Avramen ar quente senna: “Inye Eru Iluvala. Á vanta opo ni ar na ilvana. 2 Ar caruvan vérenya imbe ni ar lye, ar caruvan lye ita, ita rimba.” 3 Ar Avram lantane cendeleryanna, ar Eru carampe óse, quétala: 4 “Ar pa inye, yé, vérenya ea aselye, ar nauvan atar liyúmeo nóriva. 5 Ualye ambe nauva estaina i essenen Avram, mal esselya nauva Avraham, an lye-acárien atar liyúme nóriva. 6 Ar lye-caruvan ita, ita yavila, ar lye-caruvan nóreli, ar aralli tuluvar et lyello. 7 Ar tulcuvan véryenya imbe ni ar lye ar erdelya apa lye ter *nónareltar, ve oira vére návenyan lyen Aino, ar erdelyan apa lye. 8 Ar antauvan lyen, ar erdelyan apa lye, i nóre yasse amáriel ve aiano, i quanda Canáan·nóre, náven haryaina tennoio, ar nauvan Ainolta.”

CHAPTER 17
And when Abram had  ninety-nine years, the Lórd showed himself to Abram and said to him: “I  God Almighty. Walk before be and be perfect. 2 And I will make my covenant between me and you, and I will make you very, very numerous.” 3 And Abram fell upon his face, and god spoke with him, saying: 4 “And as for you, behold, my covenant exists with you, and you will be father of a multitude of nations. 5 You will no more be called by the name Abram, but your name will be Abraham, for I have made you father of a multitude of nations. 6 And I will make you very, very fruitful, and I will make you  nations, and kings  shall come out of you. 7 And I will establish my covenant between me and you and your seed after you through their generations, as an eternal covenant for me to be to you God, and to your seed after you. 8 And I shall give to you, and to your seed after you, the land in which you have dwelt as a stranger, the entire land of Canaan, to be possessed forever, and I shall be their God.”

	9 Eru yú quente Avrahamenna: “Ar pa elye, vérenya alye hepe, elye ar erdelya apa lye ter *nónareltar. 10 Si ná vérenya, ya hepuvalde imbi ní ar lé ar erdelya apa lyé: Ilya hanu mici le nauva *oscirna. 11 Nauvalde *oscirne *epehelmaldo hrávesse, ar nauvas tanwa véreo imbi ní ar lé. 12 Arwa ríon tolto ilya hanu nauva *oscirna mici le, ter *nónareldar, ilquen nóna i coasse, hya ñétina telpenen ilya aianollo ye ua erdelyo. 13 Yen anaie nóna coalyasse mauya náve *oscirna, yú yen anaie ñétina telpelyanen, ar vérenya nauva hráveldasse ve oira vére. 14 Mal *úoscirna hanu, ye ua anaie *oscirna *epehelmaryo hrávesse – sana quén nauva aucirna lieryallo. Vérenya arácies.”
	15 Yú quente Eru Avrahamenna: “Pa Sárai verilya, ávase ambe esta i essenen Sárai, mal Sara nauva esserya. 16 Ar aistuvan se, ar yú antauvan lyen yondo et sello. É aistuvanyes, ar nauvas amil nórion; arani lieron tuluvar et sello.”

	9 God also said to Abraham: “And concernign you, my covenant you are to keep, you and your seed after you through their generations. 10 This is my covenant, that you  will keep between me and you  and your seed after you : Every male amogn you will be circumcized. 11 You will be circumcized on the flesh on your foreskin, and it shall be a sign of covenant between me and you  12 Having  eight days every male shall be circumcized among you , through your  generations,  everyone born in the house, or obtained by money from every stranger that is not your seed. 13 For  who has been born in your house it is necessary to be circumcized, also for  who has been obtained for your money, and my conveneant shall be in their flesh as an eternal covenant. 14 And an uncircumcized male, who has not been circumcized on the flesh of his foreskin – that person will be cut off from his people. My covenant he has broken.”
	15 God also said to Abraham: “Concerning Sarai your wife, do not more call her by the name Sarai, but Sarah will be her name. 16 And I will bless her, and I will also give you a son out of her. Indeed I shall bless her, and she will be mother of nations; kings of peoples shall come out of her.”

	 17 Tá Avraham lantane cendeleryanna, ar lalanes, ar quentes endaryasse: “Ma hína nauva nóna neren arwa loaron tuxa? Ar ma Sara, nís arwa loaron *neterquean, coluva?” 18 Ar Avraham quente Erunna: “Nai Ismael coituva epe lye!” 19 Ono Eru quente: “Ananta Sara verilya coluva lyen yondo, ar antauval sen i esse Isac, ar tulcuvan vérenya óse, ve oira vére erderyan apa se. 20 Mal pa Ismael ahlárien lye. Yé, aistanyes, ar tyaruvanyes náve yavila, ar caruvanyes ita, ita rimba. Condor yunque ontuvas, ar caruvanyes túra nóre. 21 Mal vérenya tulcuvan as Isac, ye Sara coluva lyen mi lúme sina i túlala loasse.” 
	22 Sie Eru telyane carpa óse, ar lendes ama Avrahamello.

	17 Then Abraham fell upon his face, and he laughed, and he said in his heart: “Will a child be born to a man having  a hundred years? And will Sarah, a woman having  ninety years, bear?” 18 And Abraham said to God: “May Ishmael live before you!” 19 But God said: “And yet Sarah your wife will bear to you a son, and you will give him the name Isaac, and I will establish my covenant with him, as an eternal covenant for his seed after him. 20 But concerning Ishmael I have heard you. Behold, I shall bless him, and I will cause him to be fruitful, and I shall make him very, very numerous. Twelve princes he shall beget, and I shall make him a great nation. 21 But my covenant I shall establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this time in the coming year.”
	22 Thus God completed speaking with him, and he went up from Abraham.

	23 Ar Avraham nampe Ismael yondorya ar illi i náner nóne coaryasse, ar illi i ñentelyanes telperyanen, ilya hanu i quenion mi coarya Avraham, ar *oscirnes *epehelmalto hráve mi yana imya ré, ve Eru quentelyane sen. 24 Ar Avraham sáme loar nerte ar *neterquean íre anes *oscirna *epehelmaryo hrávesse. 25 Ar Ismael sáme loar neleque íre anes *oscirna *epehelmaryo hrávesse. 26 Mí sana imya ré anette *oscirne, Avraham ar Ismael yondorya. 27 Ar ilye coaryo neri, i náner nóne i coasse ar i náner ñétine aianello telpenen, náner *oscirne óse.

	23 And Abraham took Ishmael his son and all that were born in his house, and all that he had obtained for his money, every male of the people in Abraham's house, and he circumcized the flesh of their foreskin in that same day, as God had said to him. 24 And Abraham had  ninety-nine years when he was circumcized on the flesh of his foreskin. 25 And Ishmael had  thirteen years when he was circumcized on the flesh of his foreskin. 26 In that same day they were circumcized, Abraham and Ishmael his son. 27 And all the men of his house, that were born in the house and that were obtained from a stranger by money, were circumcized with him.

RANTA 18 
Epeta i Héru tannexe sen ara i nornor Mamreo, lan hámanes *lancoaryo fennasse mí amalauca ranta i aureo. 2 Íre ortanes henduryat ar yente, yé, neri nelde táraner opo se, ar íre cenneset, nornes ho i *lancavo fenna velien te. Ar cumbes cemenna 3 ar quente: “Herunya, qui sí ihírien lisse hendulyatse, mecin: Áva langa núrolya! 4 Nai pitya lesta nenwa nauva talana, ar sova taluldat, ar hamua nu i alda. 5 Ar taluvan pitya ranta massava, ar alde turya inde; epeta lertalde auta. An etta utúlielde núroldanna.” Ar quentelte: “Mára ná. Cara ve equétiel.”

CHAPTER 18
Thereafter the Lórd showed himself to him by the oaks of Mamre, while he was sitting in the door of his tent in the hottest part of the day. 2 When he raised his eyes and looked, behold, three men were standing in front of him, and when he saw them, he ran from the door of the tent to meet them, And he bent to earth 3 and said: “My lord, if now I have found grace in your eyes, please: Do not pass by your servant! 4 May a little measure of water be brought, and wash your feet, and sit down under the tree! 5 And I shall bring a small piece of bread, and you strengthen yourselves; thereafter you may go away. For therefore you have come to your servant.” And they said: “Very well. Do as you have said.”

	6 Ar Avraham vasse mir i *lancoa Saranna, ar quentes: “Lintave, á mapa lestar nelde mára mulmava, á manwa maxe ar cara corne massar!” 7 Ar Avraham norne i lamárenna, ar nampes nessa mondo, maxa ar mára, ar antanes hé i núron, ye manwane hé lintave. 8 Ar nampes tyur ar ilin, ar i nessa mondo ye manwanelyanes, ar panyanes tai opo te, ar táranes ara te nu i alda lan mátanelte. 9 Ar quentelte senna: “Masse Sara verilya?” Ar quentes: “Yé, i *lancoasse.” 10 Ar quentes: “Anwave nanwenuvan lyenna mi lúme sina i tuluvaila loasse, ar yé, euva yondo as Sara.” Ar Sara lasteáne mi *lancavo fenna, ya náne ca hé. 11 Avraham yo Sara nánet yáre, arwe rimbe loalion, ar Saran nission lé pustanelyane. 12 Ar Sara lalane sámaryasse, sánala: “Ma samuvan yére apa anaien veryana? Ar yú herunya yára ná.” 13 Tá i Héru quente Avrahamenna: “Manen ná i Sara lalane, sánala: Lau coluvan hína íre nanye yára? 14 Ma ea natto ya acca urda i Hérun ná? I sátina lúmesse nanwenuvan lyenna, mi ranta sina i loasse, ar euva yondo as Sara.”
	15 Tá Sara láquente, quétala: “Uan lalane!” An rúcanes. Mal hé quente: “Raica, an é lalanel.”

	6 And Abraham rushed into the tent to Sarah, and he said: “Quickly, take three measures of good flour, prepare a dough and make round breads!” 7 And Abraham ran to the flock, and he took a young ox, tender and good, and he gave it to the servant, who prepared it quickly. 8 And he took cheese and milk, and the young ox hat he had prepared, and it put those in front of them, and he was standing by them under the tree while they were eating.9 And they said to him: “Where  Sarah your wife?” And he said: “Behold, in the tent.” 10 And he said: “I shall actually return to you at this time in the year to come, and behold,  will be a son with Sarah.” And Sarah was listening in the door of the tent, which was behind him. 11 Abraham and Sarah were old, having many years, and to Sarah the way of women had ceased. 12 And Sarah laughed in her mind, thinking: “Will I have lust after I have been worn out? And also my lord is old.” 13 Then the Lórd said to Abraham: “How is  that Sarah laughed, thinjing: Surely I cannot bear a child when I am old? 14 Is there  matter that is too difficult for the Lórd? On the appointed time I shall return to you, in this part of  the year, and  will be a son with Sarah.”
	15 Then Sarah denied , saying: “I did not laugh.” For she was fearing. But he said: “Wrong, for indeed you laughed.”

	16 Ar i neri oronter ar lender talo, ar yentelte Soromenna, ar Avraham lende aselte mentaven  te i mallesse. 17 Ar i Héru sanne: “Ma nurtuvan Avrahamello ya inye caruva, 18 íre Avraham é oluva túra ar taura nóre, ar issenen ilye nóri cemeno nauvar aistane?” 20 Ar i Héru quente: “I rambe pa Sorom yo Omorra é túra ná, ar úcarelta é ita naica ná. 21 Untuvan cenien qui acárielte aqua ve i rambe pa sa ya utúlie ama ninna, ar qui alaielte, istuvan.” 

	16 And the men arose and went from there, and they looked towards Sodom, and Abraham went with them to send them on the road. 17 And the Lórd thought: “Am I to hide from Abraham what I will do, 18 when Abraham will indeed become a great and mighty nation, and by him all nations of earth will be blessed?” 20 And the Lórd said: “The cry about Sodom and Gomorra is indeed great, and their sin is indeed very griveous. 21 I will go down to see if they have done entirely according to the cry about it that has come up to me, and if they have not, I will know.”

	22 Ar i neri oanter talo ar lender Soromenna, mal Avraham en tárane epe i Héru. 23 Ar Avraham túle hare senna ar quente: “Lau *aupsaruval i faila as i olca? 24 Cé ear failar *lepenquean i ostosse. Ma é *aupsaruvalyet ar lá apsenuva i nómen castanen i failaron *lepenquean i ear endaryasse? 25 Laume elye care sie – nahta i faila as i olca, tyarila i faila ar i olca same i imya metta. Laume elye care sie! Ma ilya cemeno Námo ua care anan?” 26 Ar i Héru quente: “Qui hiruvan mi Sorom failar *lepenquean i ostosse, tá apsenuvan i quanda nómen castaltanen.” 27 Ar Avraham hanquente, ar eques: “Yé, evérien carpa i Hérunna, ómu nanye asto ar *litte. 28 Cé lempe nar pénaine imíca i failar *lepenquean? Ma nancaruvan, peniénen lempe, i quanda osto?” Ar hé quente: “Lá nancaruvanyes qui hiruvan tasse lempe ar *canaquean.”

	22 And the men went off from there and went to Sodom, but Abraham was still standing before the Lórd. 23 And Abraham came near to him and said: “Surely you will not wipe away the just one with the wicked one? 24 Perhaps  are fifty just ones in the city. Will you indeed wipe them away and not forgive the place by reason of the fifty just ones that are in its midst? 25 Surely you not not do so – kill the just one with the wicked one, causing the just one and the wicked one to have the same end. Surely you do not do so! Will not the Judge of all the earth do justice?” 26 And the Lórd said: “If I will find in Sodom fifty just ones in the city, then i will forgive the whole place by reason of them.” 27 And Abraham answered, and he said: “Behold, I have dared to talk to the Lórd, although I am dust and ashes. 28 Perhaps five are lacking  among the fifty just ones? Will you destroy, by the lack of five, the whole city?” And he said: “I will not destroy it if I find there five and forty.”

	29 Ar carampes henna an ata, ar quentes: “Cé *canaquean nauvar hírine tasse.” Ar hé quente: “Uan caruva sa, castanen i *canaqueáno.” 30 Ar quentes: “Nai herunya lá nauva rúşea íre carpan! Cé *nelequean nauvar hírine tasse.” Ar hé quente: “Uan caruva sa qui hiruvan tasse *nelequean.” 31 Ar quentes: “Yé, evérien quete i Hérunna. Cé *yúquean nauvar hírine tasse.” Ar hé quente: “Lá caruvanyes, castanen i *yúqueáno.” 32 Ar quentes: “Nai Herunya ua nauva rúşea íre quetin rie lú sina! Cé quean nauvar hírine tasse.” Ar hé quente: “Lá nancaruvanyes, castanen i queano.” 33 Ar i Héru lende oa apa telyanes carpa as Avraham, ar Avraham nanwenne nómeryanna.

	29 And he spoke to him yet again, and he said: “Perhaps forty will be found there.” And he said: “I shall not do it, by reason of the forty.” 30 And he said: “May my lord not be angry when I talk! Perhaps thirty will be found there.” And he said: “I shall not do it if I find there thirty.” 31 And he said: “I will not do it, by raeson of the twenty.” 32 And he said: “May my Lórd not be angry when I speak only this time! Perhaps ten will be found there.” And he said: “I will not destroy it, by reason of the ten.” 33 And the Lórd went away after he completed taking with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place.

RANTA 19 
Ar i vala atta túlet Soromenna i şinyesse, ar Lót hámane Soromo andosse. Íre Lót cenne tu, orontes velien tu, ar lantanes undu cendeleryanna i cemende. 2 Ar quentes: “Iquin, herunyar, i tuliste oa mir i coa núrostava. Á lemya tasse ter i lóme, ar sova talustat. Tá ortuvaste arinyave menien tiestasse.” Mal quentette: “Vá, an lemyuvamme i yonda nómesse ter i lóme.” 3 Mal ita mauyanes tu, ar lendette oa óse ar túlet mir coarya. Ar carnes tun meren ar mastane *alapalúne massali, ar mantelte. 

RANTA 19
And the two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he arose to meet them, and he fell down upon his face on the earth. 2 And he said: “I pray, my lords, that you come away into the house of your servant. Remain there through the night, and wash your feet. Then you will arise early to go on your road.” But they said: “No, for we will stay in the broad place through the night.” 3 But he very much compelled them, and they went with him and came into his house. And he made for them a feast and baked some unleavened breads, and they ate.

	4 Mal nó cainunelte, i neri i ostollo, Soromo neri, pelder i coa – nessar yo yárar, i quanda lie ilya rantallo. 5 Ar yámelte Lótenna ar quenter senna: “Masse i neri i túler lyenna şinye sinasse? Átu tala etsenna menna, istielman tu!” 6 Ar Lót etelende mir i latya, mal i fende holtanes ca inse. 7 Ar quentes: “Iquin, torninyar, in ualde care olca nat! 8 Yé, mecin! Eat óni selye atta yet uat isistie nér. Lava nin menta tú etsenna len, ar átun care ve mára ná henduldatse. Rie cara munta sine nerin, i castanen in utúliette nu leonna túpanyo!” 9 Mal quentelte: “Leva oa!” Ar quentelte: “Quén sina túle sir marien ve aiano, ar cáras inse námo! Sí caruvan lyen nat olca lá ya caruvalme tún!” Ar nirnelte ita ana i nér, ana Lót, ar túler hari racien i fende. 10 Mal i neri eterahtaner máttanten ar taller Lót mir i coa túna, ar i fende holtanette. 11 Ar i neri i enger opo i coalatya pentette lacenítiénen, pityar ar hoar véla, ar yeryanelte inte hirien i latya. 12 Ar i neri quenter Lótenna: “Ma ear aselye an queni sisse? Selyelyaron veruvi, ar yondolyar, ar selyelyar, ar aiquen ye ea aselye i ostosse, áte tala et nóme sinallo! 13 An nancaruvamme nóme sina, an i rambe pa te olólie túra opo i Héru, ar i Héru ementaye met nancarien i osto.” 

	4 But before they laid down, the men from the city, the men of Sodom, surrounded the house – young ones and old ones, all the people from every part. 5 And they cried to Lot and said to him: “Where are the men that came to you this evening? Bring them outside to us, for us to know them!” 6 And Lot went out into the opening, but the door he closed behind himself. 7 And he said: “I pray, my brothers, that you do not do a wicked thing! 8 Behold, please! There are with me two daughters that have not known man. Let me send them  outside to you, and to them  do what is good in your eyes. Only do nothing to these men, for the reason that they  have come under the shadow of my roof.” 9 But they said: “Move away!” And they said: “This man came here to dwell as a stranger, and he is making himself a judge! Now we will do to you a more wicked thing than what we will do to them !” And they pressed extremely  against the man, against Lot, and came near to break the door. 10 But the men reached out with their  hands and brought Lot into the house to them, and the door they closed. 11 And the men that were before the house-entrance they struck with blindness, small and great alike, and the door they closed. 12 And the men said to Lot: “Is there with you more people here? Your daughters' husbands, and your sons, and your daughters, and anyone who is with you in the city, bring them out from this place! 13 For we will destroy this place, for the cry about them has become great before the Lórd, and the Lórd has sent us to destroy the city.”

	14 Ar Lót etelende ar carampe i nerinnar veryuvaila selyeryannar, ar quentes: “Á orta, á hehta nóme sina, an i Héru nancaruva i osto!” Mal in veryumner selyeryannar nemnes ve quén nyárala tunce nyarna. 15 Ar íre arin túle, i vali hortaner Lót, quétala: “Á orta, á mapa verilya ar selyelya atta i ear sisse, hya nauval *aupsarna i osto ongwenen.” 16 Mal lemnes. Tá i neri namper márya ar selyerya atto má, an í Héru merne órava sesse. An tallettes etsenna, ar panyanettes i osto etsesse. 17 Tá, apa tallettet etsenna, er mici tú quente: “Uşa cuilelyan! Áva yéta nan ca lye, ar áva hauta i quanda Nandasse. I orontenna alye uşa, hya nauval *aupsarna!” 

	14 And Lot went out and spoke to the men that were to marry his daughters, and he said: “Arise, leave this place, for the Lórd is going to destroy the city!” But to those that were going to marry his daughters he seemed like a man telling a funny story. 15 And when morning came, the angels urged Lot, saying: “Arise, take your wife and your two daughters that are here, or you will be wiped away by the crime of the city.” 16 But he tarried. Then the men took his hand and the hand of his two daughers, for the Lórd wanted to have mercy on him. And they  and put him on the outside of the city. 17 Then, after they  brought him out, one among them  said: “Flee for your life! Do not look back behind you, and do not stop in the entire Plain. To the mountain you are to fly, or you will be wiped away!”

	18 Mal Lót quente túna: “Ai, vá, herunya! 19 Yé, núrolya ihírie lisse aselye, ar acáriel túra i oravie ya táneal nin rehtien cuilenya. Lá ece nin uşe i orontenna, hya i urrie anyuva ni, ar qualuvan. 20 Ela, enta osto hare ná uşien tar, ar sá pitya ná! Lava nin uşe tar! Nás pitya, ma naite? Sie hepuvan cuilenya.” 21 Ar hé quente senna: “Yé, lastuvan lyenna yú natto sinasse, i lá nuqueruvan i osto pa ya equétiel. 22 Na linta, uşa tar! An ece nin care munta nó utúliel tar.” Etta i osto same i esse Sóar (Pitya).
	23 Anar oronte or i nóre íre Lót túle Sóarenna. 24 Tá i Héru mentane Sorom yo Omorranna ulo *ussarneva ar náreva – i Hérullo, et menello. 25 Sie nuquernes sane ostor ar i quanda Nanda ar illi i máraner i ostossen, ar i olvar i talamesse. 26 Mal Lóto veri yente nan ca se, ar olles tarma singeva. 

	18 But Lot said to them : “Alas, no, my lord! 19 Behold, your servant has found grace with you, and you have made great the mercy that you are showing me to save my life. It is not possible for me to flee to the mountant, or the evil will reach me, and I will die. 20 Behold, that city is nar to flee there, and it is small! Let me flee thither! It is small, is it not? Thus I will keep my life.” 21 And he said to him: “Behold, I will listen to you also in this matter, that I will not overturn the city of which you have spoken. 22 Be quick, flee thither! For there is nothing that is possible for me to do before you have come thither.” Therefore the city's name is Zoar (Small).
	23 The sun arose above the land when Lot came to Zoar. 24 Then the Lórd sent upon Sodom and Gomorrah a rain of brimstone and of fire – from the Lórd, out of heaven. 25 Thus he overturned those cities and the entire Plain and all that were dwelling in the cities, and the plants on the ground. 26 But Lot's wife looked back behind him, and she became a pillar of salt. 

	27 Ar Avram oronte arinyave, ar i arinde lendes i nómenna yasse tarnelyanes epe i Héru. 28 Ar yentes Sorom yo Omorranna, ar i quanda nórenna i Nandasse, ar cennes i usque ortala i nórello ve i usque urnallo. 
	29 Sie túle, íre Eru nancarne i Nando ostor, in Eru enyalde Avraham ar talle Lót etsenna et i endello i nuqueriéno, lan nuquéranes i ostor yassen Lót marnelyane.
	30 Ar Lót lende ama et Sóarello, ar marnes i orontesse, ar selyerya atta óse, an runces mariello Sóaresse. Ar marnes felyasse, isse ar selyerya atta.  31 Ar i minnóna quente i amnessanna: “Atarengwa yára ná, ar lá ea nér i nóresse tulien venta ilya cemeno lénen. 32 Tula, angwe tyare atarengwa suce limpe, ar caituvangwe óse. Sie hepuvangwe erde coirea ho atarengwa.” 33 Ar tyarnette ataretta suce limpe şinye yanasse. Ar i minnóna mittane, ar caines as atarya, ar hé ua sinte íre cainunes hya íre orontes.

	27 And Abram arose early, and in the morning he went to the place where he had stood before the Lórd. 28 And he looked at Sodom and Gomorrah, and the entire land in the Plain, and he saw the reek rising from the land like the reek from an oven.
	29 Thus it came , when God destroyed the cities of the Plain, that God recalled Abraham and brought Lot outside out of the midst of the overturning, while he was overturning the cities in which Lot had dwelt.
	30 And Lot went up out of Zoar, and he dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughers with him, for he feared to dwell  in Zoar. And they dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters. 31 And the firstborn said to the youngest one: “Our  father is old, and there is no man in the land to come to us by the manner of all the earth. 32 Come, let us cause our father to drink wine, and we will lie with him. Thus we will keep seed alive from our father.” 33 And they caused their father to drink wine that evening. And the firstborn entered, and she lay with her father, and he did not know when she laid down or when she arose. 

	34 Ar túle i arinde in i minnóna quente i amnessanna: “Yé, i vanwa lómisse cainen as atar. Angwe tyaritas suce limpe yú şinye sinasse, ar atye mitta ar caita óse. Sie hepuvangwe erde coirea ho atarengwa.” 35 Ar tyarnette ataretta suce limpe yú sana şinyesse. Ar i amnessa oronte ar caine óse, ar hé ua sinte íre cainunes hya íre orontes. 36 Sie Lóto selye atta nostanet atarettanen.  37 Ar i minnóna colde yondo ar antane hén i esse Moav (Atarello). Hé ná atar Moavyaron, i ear tenna ré sina. 38 Ar pa i amnessa, yú isse colde yondo, ar antanes hén i esse Ven-Ammi (Lienyo Yondo). Hé ná atar Ammonyaron, i ear tenna ré sina.
	
	34 And it came  in the morning that the firstborn said to the younger one: “Behold, in the past night I laid  with father. Let us case him to drink wine also in this evening, and you enter and sleep  with him. Thus we will keep seed alive from our father.” 35 And they caused their father to drink wine also in that evening. And the younger one arose and slept  with him, and he did not know when she laid down or when she arose. 36 Thus Lot's two daughters conceived by their father. 37 And the firstborn bore a son and gave him the name Moab (From Father). He is father of the Moabites, that exist until this day. 38 And as for the younger, she too bore a son, and she gave him the name Ben-Ammi (Son of My People). He is father of the Ammonites, that exist until this day.

RANTA 20 
Ar Avraham lende talo Nehev·nórenna, ar marnes imbe Cares ar Hyúr, ar séranes ve aiano mi Erar. 2 Ar Avraham quente pa Sara verirya: “Náse néşanya.” Ar Avimelec aran Eraro mentane ar nampe Sara.

CHAPTER 20
And Abraham went from there to the land of Negeb, and he dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and he was dweling  in Gerar. 2 And Abraham said about Sarah his wife: “She is my sister.” And Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah.

	3 Mal Eru túle Avimelecenna mi olos i lómio, ar quentes senna: “Yé, qualuval, castanen i nisso ye amápiel ómu náse nero veri.” 4 Ono Avimelec úne túlienwa hare senna, ar quentes: “Herunya, ma nahtuval yú faila nóre? 5 Ma isse ua quente ninna: Náse néşanya – ? Ar i nís, ma isse ua quente: Náse hánonya – ? Holmo endanen ar pen cáma mányatse acárien si.” 6 Ar Eru quente senna i oloresse: “Yú inye ista i holmo endanen acáriel si. Ente, yú inye lye-pustane úcariello ninna. Etta uan láve lyen appa se. 7 Ar sí, á menta nan i nero veri, an náse Erutercáno, ar hyamuvas lyen, ar coituval. Mal qui ual menta nan i nís, á ista in é qualuval, elye ar ilye véralyar.”

	3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and he said to him: “Behold, you will die, by reason of the woman that you have taken although she is a man's wife.” 4 But Abimelech was not come near to her, and he said: “My lord, will you kill also a just nation? 5 Did not he say to me: She is my sister – ? And the woman, did not she say: He is my brother – ? Sincerely by heart and without guilt in my hands I have done this.” 6 And God said to him in the dream: “I too know that sincerely by heart you have done this. Furthermore, also I stopped you from sinning against me. Therefore I did not allow you to touch her. 7 And now, send back the man's wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for you, and you will live. But if you do not send back the woman, know that you will die indeed, you and all your own.”

	8 Ar Avimelec oronte arinyave mí arin, ar yaldes ilye núroryar, ar nyarnes ilye nattor sine hlarultatse, ar i neri runcer túrave. 9 Tá Avimelec yalde Avraham ar quente senna: “Mana acáriel men? Ar manen úacárien lyen, pan atáliel ninna ar aranienyanna túra úcare? Taiti cardar yar mo ua care acáriel nin!” 10 Ar Avimelec quente Avrahamenna: “Mana sannel, pan acáriel nat sina?” 11 Ar Avraham quente: “Carnenyes pan sannen: Tanca ná i queni uar ruce Erullo nóme sinasse, ar nahtuvalten castanen verinyo. 12 Ente, é náse néşanya, atarinyo selye, mal lá amillinyo selye. Ar olles verinya. 13 Ar túle, íre Eru tyarne ni vanta oa i coallo atarinyava, i quenten senna: Si ná i márie ya tanuval nin: Ilya nómesse yanna tulingwe, queta pa ni: Náse hánonya.”

	8 And Abimelech arose early in the morning, and he called all his servants, and he told all these matters in their ears , and the men feared greatly. 9 Then Abimelech called Abraham and said to him: “What have you done to us? And how have I sinned against you, since you have brought upon me and upon my kingdom great sin? Such deeeds that one does not  do you have done to me!” 10 And Abimelech said to Abraham: “What did you think, since you have done this thing?” 11 And Abraham said: “I did it since I thought:  is certain that people do not fear God in this place, and they will kill me by reason of my wife. 12 Furthermore, she is indeed my sister, my father's daughter, but not my mother's daughter. And she became my wife. 13 And it came , when God caused me to walk away from my father's house, that I said to her: “This is the good that you will show me: In every place to which we come, say about me: He is my brother.”

	14 Ar Avimelec nampe mámar ar mondor. ar hanwe ar inye móli, ar antanéset Avrahámen, ar mentane Sara verirya nan henna. 15 Ar Avimelec quente: “Yé, i quanda nóre caita opo lye. Mara i nómesse ya fasta lye.” 16 Ar Saranna quentes: “Yé, ánien hánolyan telperantar húme. Yé, ta nauva lyen topie henduva illin i ear aselye, ar epe illi acámiel failie.” 17 Ar Avraham hyamne Erunna, ar Eru nestane Avimelec ar verirya ar inye mólyar, ar coldelte híni. 18 An i Héru tancave pahtanelyane ilye mónar i coasse Avimelequa, castanen Saro, Avrahámo veri.

	14 And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and male and female thralls, and gave them to Abraham, and sent Sarah his wife back to him. 15 And Abimelech said: “Behold, the whole land lies before you. Dwell in the place that pleases you.” 16 And to Sarah he said: “Behold, I have given your brother a hundred silver pieces. Behold, that will be for you a covering of eyes for all that are here, and before all you have received justice.” 17 And Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife and his female thralls, and they bore children. 18 For the Lórd had firmly shut all wombs in the house of Abimelec, by reason of Sarah, Abraham's wife.

RANTA 21 
Ar i Héru enyalde Sara ve quentelyanes, ar i Héru carne Saran ve carampelyanes. 2 Ar Sara nostane, ar coldes Avrahámen yondo yárieryasse, mí lúme pa ya Eru carampelyane senna. 3 Ar Avraham antane yondoryan ye náne nóna sen, ye Sara colde sen, i esse Ísac. 4 Ar Avraham *oscirne Ísac yondorya íre hé sáme rí tolto, ve Eru cannelyane sen. 5 Ar Avraham sáme loar tuxa íre Ísac yondorya náne nóna sen. 6 Ar Sara quente: “Lalie Eru amanwie nin. Ilquen ye hlare laluva pa ni.” 7 Yú quentes: “Man quetumne Avrahamenna: Sara *tyetuva híni! An ocólien sen yondo yárieryasse!”

CHAPTER 21
And the Lórd remembered Sarah as he had said, and the Lórd did to Sarah as he had spoken. 2 And Sarah conceived, and she bore to Abraham a son in his old age, at the time of which God had spoken to her. 3 And Abraham gave to his son who was born to him, who Sarah bore to him, the name Isaac. 4 And Abraham circumcized Isaac his son when he had  eight days, as God had commanded him. 5 And Abraham had  a hundred years when Isaac his son was born to him. 6 And Sarah said: “Laughing God has prepared for me. Everyone who hears will laugh about me.” 7 She also said: “Who was going to say to Abraham: Sarah will suckle children! For I have borne to him a son in his old age!”

	8 Ar i hína alle ar pustane suce amilleryo ilin. Ar Avraham carne túra meren mí aure yasse Ísac pustane suce ilin amilleryallo. 9 Ar Sara cenne Háhar i Mirro yondo, ye coldelyanes Avrahámen, lengala yaiwenen. 10 Etta quentes Avrahamenna: “Á ele oa mól sina ar yondorya, an i mólo yondo lá nauva aryon as ninya yondo – as Ísac.” 11 Mal i natto náne naicelea mi Avrahámo hendu, castanen yondoryo. 12 Ono Eru quente Avrahamenna: “Áva same naire pa i seldo ar pa mólelya. Ilquasse ya Sara quéta lyenna, á lasta ómaryanna. An ho Ísac tuluva ya nauva estaina erdelya. 13 Mal yú i mólo yondo caruvan nóre, pan hé yondolya ná.”

	9 And the child grew and stopped drinking his mother's milk. And Abraham made a great feast in the day when Isaac stopped drinking milk from his mother. 9 And Sarah saw Hagar the Egyptian's son, whom she had borne to Abraham, behaving with scorn. 10 Therefore she said to Abraham: “Drive away this thrall and her son, for the thrall's son shall not be an heir with my son – with Isaac.” 11 But the matter was grieveous in Abraham's eyes, by reason of his son. 12 But God said to Abraham: “Do not have grief about the boy and about your thrall. In everything that Sarah is saying to you, listen to her voice. For from Isaac shall come what will be called your seed. 13 But also the thrall's son I shall make a nation, since he is your son.”

	14 Ar Avraham oronte arinyave mí arin, ar nampes massa ar olpe neno, ar antanes sa Háharen, panyala sa almoryasse, ar i hína, ar mentanes hé oa. Ar hé oante ar lemne i ravandasse ara Vëer-Hyeva.
	15 Íre lá enge amba nén i olpesse, hantes i hína nu erenna i tussaron. 16 Ar lendes oa, ar hamunes haiya hello, tambe haiya síve pilin mene, an quentes: “Nai lá yétuvan íre i hína quale!” Ar hámanes oa hello, ar ortanes ómarya mi nyenye.

	14 And Abraham arose early in the morning, and he took bread and a bottle of water, and he gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and he sent her away. And she went and tarried in the wilderness by Beer-Sheba. 
	15 When  was no more water in the bottle, she threw the child under one of the bushes. 16 And she went away, and she sat down far from him, as far as an arrow goes, for she said: “May I not look on when the child dies!” And she was stitting away from him, and she raised her voice in weeping.

	17 Ar Eru hlasse i seldo óma, ar Eruo vala yáme Háharenna et menello, ar quentes senna: “Mana quárelelya, Háhar? Áva ruce, an Eru ahlárie i seldo óma yasse cáyas. 18 Tara, á orta i seldo, ar áse mapa mályanen, an caruvanyes túra nóre.” 19 Ar Eru pantane henyat, ar cennes tampo neno, ar lendes ar quante i olpe nennen ar láve i seldon suce. 20 Ar Eru enge as i seldo, ar alles, ar marnes i ravandasse ar olle nér i quingo. 21 Ar marnes Paran·ravandasse, ar amillerya nampe sen veri  Mirrandorello.

	17 And God heard the boy's voice, and God's angel cried to Hagar out of heaven, and he said to her: “What is your trouble, Hagar? Do not fear, for God has head the boy's voice where he is lying. 18 Stand, lift up the boy, and take him by your hand, for I shall make him a great nation.” 19 And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the bottle with water and let the boy drink. 20 And God was with the boy, and he grew, and he dwelt in the wilderness and became a man of the bow. 21 And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran, and his mother took to him a wife from Egypt.

	22 Ar túle lúme yanasse in Avimelec ar Pícol hosseryo hesto caramper Avrahamenna, quétala: “Eru ea aselye ilquasse ya caril. 23 Etta ánin anta vandalya Erunen in ual lenguva mi hurila lé nin hya yondonyan hya yondonyo yondon, mal i tanuval nin, ar i nóren yasse amáriel, i imya lisse ya atánien lyen.” 24 Ar Avraham quente: “Antan vandanya.”
	25 Mal Avraham naicine Avimelec pa tampo neno ya Avimeléco núror nampelyaner. 26 Ono Avimelec quente: “Uan ista man acárie nat sina. Ente, elye ual anyárie nin, ar yú inye ua ahlárie pa ta, hequa síra.”

	22 And it came  at that time that Abimelech and Pichol his army's captain spoke to Abraham, saying: “God is with you in everything that you do. 23 Therefore give me your oath by God that you will not behave in a lying way to me or to my son or to my son's son, but that you will show to me, and to the land in which you have dwelt, the same grace that I have shown you.” 24 And Abraham said: “I give my oath.”
	25 But Abraham rebuked Abimelech about a well of water that Abimelech's servants had taken. 26 But Abimelech said: “I do not know who has done this thing. Furthermore, you have not told me, and I as well have not heard about that, except today.”

	27 Ar Avraham nampe mámali ar mondoli ar antane te Avimelécen, ar i atta tulcanet vére. 28 Mal Avraham panyane inye euler otso satya nómesse.
	29 Ar Avimelec quente Avrahamenna: “Mana tear sine inye euler otso ya apániel satya nómesse?” 30 Ar quentes: “Sine inye euler otso alye mapa mányallo, ve *vettie nin in asápien tampo sina.”
	31 Etta sana nóme náne estana Vëer-Hyeva (Tampo Vandava), an tasse tú yúyo antanet vandatta. 32 Sie tulcanette vére Vëer-Hyevasse, ar Avimelec oronte as Pícol hosseryo hesto, ar nanwenette mir i Filistyaron nóre. 33 Ar Avraham empanne singealda Vëer-Hyevasse ar yalde tasse i essenen i Héruo, i Oira Aino. 34 Tá Avraham marne i Filistyaron nóresse ter anda lúme.

	27 And Abraham took some sheep and oxen and gave them to Abimelech, and the two  established a covenant. 28 But Abraham put seven female lambs in a separate place.
	29 And Abimelech said to Abraham: “What do these seven female lambs that you have put in a separate place mean?” 30 And he said: “These seven female lambs you are to take from my hand, as a witness to me that I have dug this well.”
	31 Therefore that place was called Beer-Sheba (Well of Oath), for there they both gave their oath. 32 Thus they established a coventant in Beer-Sheba, and Abimelech arose with Phicol captain of his army, and they returned into the land of the Philistines. 33 And Abraham planted a salt-tree  in Beer-Sheba and called there on the name of the Lórd, the Eternal Deity. 34 Then Abraham dwelt int he land of the Philistines for  a long time. 

RANTA 22 
Ar túle apa nati sine in Eru tyastane Avraham, ar quentes senna: “Avraham!” Ar hé quente: “Sisse nanye.”  2 Ar quentes: “Á mapa yondolya, eryalya, ye melil, Ísac, ar mena Moria·nórenna, ar áse *yace tasse ve urtana *yanca to er i orontion ya teuvan lyen.”
	3 Ar Avraham oronte arinyave mí arin, ar panyanes sonda to *pelloporya, ar talles atta mici nesse neryar óse, ar Ísac yondorya. Ar hyarnes i toa i urtana *yancan, ar orontes ar lende i nómenna pa ya Eru quentelyane senna. 4 I neldea auresse Avraham ortane henyat ar cenne i nóme hairallo. 5 Ar Avraham quente nesse neryannar: “Á lemya sisse as i *pellopo, lan inye ar i seldo menuvar tar, ar *tyeruvamme. Tá nanwenuvamme lenta.”

CHAPTER 22
And it came  after these things that God tested Abraham, and he said to him: “Abraham!” And he said: “Here I am.” 2 And he said: “Take your son, your sole one, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah, and sacrifice him there as a burnt sacrifice on one of the mountains that I will indicate do you.”
	3 And Abraham arose early in the morning, and he put a seat  on his ass, and he brought two among his young men with him, and Isaac his son. And he split the wood for the burnt sacrifice, and he arose and went to the place about which God has spoken to him. 4 On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from afar. 5 And Abraham said to his young men: “Remain here with the ass, while I and the boy go thither, and we will worship. Then we  will return to you .”

	6 Ar Avraham nampe i toa i urtana *yancan, ar caitane sa to Ísac yondorya, ar nampes máryasse i náre ar i sicil. Tá lendette uo, i atta.
	7 Ar Ísac carampe Avraham ataryanna, ar quentes: “Atarinya!” Ar hé quente: “Sisse nanye, yonya.” Ar quentes: “Sís ear i náre ar i toa, mal masse i eule i urtana *yancan?” 8 Ar Avraham quente: “Eru hiruva insen i eule urtana *yancan, yonya.” Ar lendette uo, i atta.
	9 Ar túlette i nómenna pa ya Eru nyarnelyane sen, ar Avraham carastane i *yangwa tasse, ar *partane i toa, ar nunte Ísac yondorya ar caitane se to i *yangwa, i toanna. 10 Ar Avraham rahtane máryanen ar nampe i sicil nahtien yondorya.
	11 Tá i Héruo vala yáme senna et menello, ar quentes: “Avraham, Avraham!” Ar hé quente: “Sisse nanye.” 12 Ar quentes: “Áva caita málya i seldonna ar ásen care munta! An sí istan in elye ruce Erullo, pan ual váquente anta nin yondolya, eryalya.”

	6 And Abraham took the wood for the burnt sacrifice, and laid it on Isaac his son, and he took in his hand the fire and the knife. Then they went together, the two .
	7 And Isaak spoke to Abraham his father, and he said: “My father!” And he said: “Here I am, my son.” And he said: “Here are the fire and the wood, but where  the lamb for the burnt sacrifice?” 8 And Abraham said: “God will find for himself the lamb for the burnt sacrifice, my son.” And they went together, the two .
	9 And they came to the place of which God had told him, and Abraham built the altar there, and he arranged the wood, and bound Isaac his son and laid him on the alter, upon the wood. 10 And Abraham reached out with his hand and took the kife to kill his son.
	11 Then the Lórd's angel cried to him out of heaven, and he said: “Abraham, Abraham!” And he said: “Here I am.” 12 And he said: “Do not lay your hand on the boy and do nothing to him! For now I know that you fear God, since you did not refuse to give me your son, your only one.”

	13 Ar Avraham ortane henyat ar yente, ar yé, enge tasse camo mapana mí tussar rasseryanten.  Ar Avraham lende ar nampe i camo, ar *yanceses ve urtana *yanca yondoryo mende.
	14 Ar Avraham antane sana nómen i esse Yahue-Yíre (i Héru Cenuva), ve mo quete síra: “I orontesse yasse i Héru ná cénaina.” 15 Ar i Héruo vala yáme Avrahamenna tatya lú et menello, 16 ar quentes: “Inyenen antan vandanya, quete i Héru: Pan carnel nat sina ar ual váquente anta nin yondolya, eryalya, 17 é lye-aistuvan ar é lye-caruvan rimba, ve menelo tinwi ar ve i litse i hrestasse earo, ar erdelya haryuva ñottoryo ando, 18 ar erdelyanen ilye cemeno nóri nauvar aistane, pan alastiel ómanyanna.” 
	19 Ar Avraham nanwenne nesse neryannar, ar orontelte ar lender uo Vëer-Hyevanna. Tá Avraham márane Vëer-Hyevasse.

	13 And Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold,  was a ram seized in the bushes by its horns. And Abraham went and took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt sacrifice in his son's stead. 
	14 And Abraham gave to that place the name Yahweh-Yireh (the Lórd Shall See), as one says today: “On the mountain where the Lórd is being seen.” 15 And the Lórd's angel cried to Abraham a second time out of heaven, 16 and he said: “By myself I give my oath, says the Lórd: Since you did this thing and you did not refuse to give me your son, your only one, 17 I shall indeed bless you and I shall indeed make you numerous, like the stars of heaven and like the sand on the shore of the sea, and your seed shall possess the gate of its enemy, 18 and by your seed all nations of earth shall be blessed, since you have listened to my voice.”
	19 And Abraham returned to his young men, and they arose and went together to Beer-Sheva. Then Abraham was dwelling in Beer-Sheva.

	20 Ar túle apa nati sine i náne nyárina Avrahámen: “Yé, Milca yú ocólie hínali Náħor hánolyan: 21 Ús minnónarya, ar Vús hánorya, ar Cemuel i atar Aramo, 22 ar Ceser ar Ħaso ar Pildas ar Yirlaf ar Vetuel.” 
	23 Ar Vetuel óne Revecca. Tolto sine Milca colde Náħoren, Avrahámo háno. 24 Ar *ovesserya, yeo esse nane Reuma, yú colde hínali: Tevaħ ar Aħam ar Taħas ar Maaca.

	20 And it came  after these things that  was told to Abraham: “Behold, Milcah has also born some children to Nahor your brother: 21 Uz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram, 22 and Kesed and Hazo and Pildash and Jidlaph and Bethuel.” 
	23 And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These eight Milcah bore to Nahor, the brother of Abraham. 24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore some children: Tebah and Gaham and Tahash and Maacah.

RANTA 23 
Ar Saro coivie náne loar otso ar *yúquean ar tuxa; tai náner Saro coiviéno loar. 2 Ar Sara qualle mi Ciryat-Arva – ta ná, Ħevron – Canáan·nóresse, ar Avraham túle hepien naire Saran ar nainien se. 3 Tá Avraham oronte epe qualinaryallo, and carampes i Ħetyannar, quétala: 4 “Nanye ettelea ar aiano mici le. Ánin anta noire ya haryuvan mici le, lavila nin tala qualinanya sapsanna, oa hendunyalto.” 5 Ar i Ħetyar hanquenter Avrahamenna, quétala senna: 6 “Á lasta menna, herunya! Nalye Eru turco mici me. I aryasse noirilmaron á panya qualinalya! Lá ea erya quén mici me ye hepuva noirirya lyello, lye-pustala taliello qualinalya sapsanna.” 

CHAPTER 23
And Sarah's life was a hundred and twenty-seven years; those where the years of Sarah's life. 2 And Sarah died in Kiriath-Arba – that is, Hebron – in the land of Canaan, and Abraham came to keep grief for Sarah and for lamenting her. 3 Then Abraham arose from before his dead, and he spoke to the Hittites, saying: 4 “I am foreign and a stranger among you. Give me a tomb that I will possess among you, allowing me to bring my dead to a grave, away from my eyes.” 5 And the Hittites answered Abraham, saying to him: 6 “Listen to us, my lord! You are a chief of God among us. In the best of our tombs place your dead one! There is not a single person among us who will keep his tomb from you, stopping you from bringing your dead one to a grave.”

	7 Ar Avraham oronte ar cumbe epe i nóreo lie, epe i Ħetyar. 8 Ar carampes téna, quétala: “Qui şáquetilde i taluvan qualinanya sapsanna, oa hendunyalto, á lasta ninna, ar cara arcande nin Efronden, yondorya Sóhar, 9 in antauvas nin i Macpela-rotto ya samis, ya caita restaryo rénasse. I quanda nonwen ya sa tuvue nai antauvas nin sá endeldasse, ve sapsanóme ya haryuvan.”

	7 And Abraham arose and bowed before the people of the land, before the Hittites. 8 And he spoke to them, saying: “If you consent that I will bring my dead to a grave, away from my eyes, listen to me, and make petition for me to Ephron, the son of Zohar, 9 that he will give me the Machpelah cave that he has, which lies at the edge of his field. For the full sum that it costs may he give it to me in your midst, as a grave-place that I will possess.”

	10 Efron é hárane imíca i Ħetyar, ar Efron i Ħetya hanquente Avrahamenna lan i Ħetyar hláraner, illi i náner ostoryo andosse. Eques: 11 “Vá, herunya! Á lasta ninna! I resta antan lyen. Yú i rotto ya ea sasse – lyen antanyes. Epe lienyo queni antanyes lyen. Á tala qualinalya sapsanna!”
	12 Mal Avraham lantane undu epe i nóreo lie, quétala: “Qui elye rie lastumne ninna! Antauvan i telpe ya i resta tuvue! Ása mapa nillo, ar taluvan qualinanya sapsanna tasse.” 14 Ar Efron hanquente Avrahamenna, quétala senna: 15 “Herunya, á lasta ninna! Ranta cemenwa valda hyecelion tuxar canta telpeva, mana ta imbe ni ar lye? Á tala qualinalya sapsanna!” 16 Ar Avraham hlasse mana Efron quente, ar *lestanes Efronden i talme telpeo ya estanes lan i Ħetyar hláraner, hyeceli tuxar canta telpeva, i nostaleo ya macari camuvar. 

	10 Ephron was indeed sitting among the Hittites, and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham while the Hittites were hearing, all that were in the gate of his city. He said: 11 “No, my lord! Listen to me! The field I give to you. Also the cave that is on it – to you I give it. Before the persons of my people I give it to you. Bring your dead to a grave!” 
	12 But Abram fell down before the people of the land, saying: “If you would only listen to me! I will give the money that the field costs! Take it from me, and I will bring my dead to a grave there.” 14 And Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him: 15 “My lord, listen to me! A piece of earth worth four hundred shekels of silver, what is that between me and you? Bring your dead to a grave!” 16 And Abraham heard what Ephron said, and he measured  to Ephron the weight which he named while the Hittites were hearing, four hundred shekels of silver, of the kind that merchants will receive .

	17 Sie Efrondo resta, ya enge mi Macpela ya caita epe Mamre – i resta, i rotto ya enge tasse, ar ilye i aldar i enger i restasse, é ca ilye rénar pelila sa – náner vácine 18 Avrahámen, isse haryala sa epe i Ħetyaron hendu, epe illi i mttaner ter ostoryo ando. 19 Ar epeta Avraham talle Sara verirya sapsanna i rottosse ya ea i Macpela-restasse epe Mamre – ta ná, Ħevron – Canáan·nóresse. 20 Ar i resta ar i rotto ya ea sasse oller Avrahanwa, ve véra sapsanóme ya haryanes i Ħetyallon.

	17 Thus Ephron's field, which was in Machpelah which lies before Mamre – the field, the cave that was there, and all the trees that were on the field, indeed behind all its borders surrounding it – were sold 18 to Abraham, he possessing it before the eyes of the Hittites, before all that entered through the gate of his city. 19 And thereafter Abraham brought Sarah his wife to a grave in the cave that is in the Machpelah field in front of Mamre – that is, Hebron – in the land of Canaan. 20 And the field and the cave that is in it became Abraham's, as a private grave-place that he possesssed from the Hittites.

RANTA 24 
Sí Avraham náne yára, arwa rimbe rélion, ar i Héru aistanelyane Avraham ilye natissen. 2 Ar Avraham quente núroryanna, i amyára coaryasse, ye turne ilqua ya sámes: “Mecin, á panya málya nu tiuconya, 3 ar tyaruvan lye anta vandalya i Hérunen, menelo Aino ar cemeno Aino, i válye mapa veri yondonyan ho mici nissi i Canáanyaron, imíca i máran. 4 Mal alye lelya nórenyanna ar nossenyanna mapien veri yondoyan – Ísacen.” 5 Ar i núro quente senna: “Cé i nís ua meruva hilya ni nóre sinanna. Ma taluvan yondolya nan i nórenna yallo túlel?” 6 Ar Avraham quente senna: “Tira imle i ával tala yondonya nan tar. 7 I Héru, menelo Aino, ye nampe ni coallo atarinyava ar i nórello yasse anen nóna, ar ye carampe ninna ar ye antane nin vandarya, quétala: Erdelyan antauvan nóre sina – isse mentauva valarya epe lye, ar mapuval veri yondonyan talo. 8 Ar qui i nís ua mere hilya lye, tá nauval léra sina vandanyallo. Rie áva tala yondonya nan tar.” 9 Tá i núro panyane márya nu Avraham heruryo tiuco, and antanes hén vandarya pa natto sina. 

CHAPTER 24
Now Abraham was old, having many days, and the Lórd had blessed Abraham in all things. 2 And Abraham said to his servant, the eldest in his house, who controlled everything that he had: “Please, put your hand under my thigh, 3 and I will cause you to give yoru oath by the Lórd, God of heaven and God of earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from among the women of the Canaanites, among whom I am dwelling. 4 But you are to go to my land and to my kin to take a wife for my son – for Isaac.” 5 And the servatn said to him: “Perhaps the woman will not want to follow me to this land. Am I to bring your son back to the land from which you came?” 6 And Abraham said to him: “Watch yourself that you do not bring my son back thither. 7 The Lórd, God of heaven, who took me from my father's house and from the land in which I was born, and who spoke to me and who gave me his oath, saying: To your seed I shall give this land – he will send his angel before you, and you shall take a wife for my son from there. 8 And if the woman does not wish to follow you, then you shall be free from this oath of mine. Only do not bring my son back thither.” 9 Then the servant put his hand under Abraham his master's thigh, and he gave to him  his oath concerning this affair.

	10 Ar i núro nampe ulumpi quean ho mici i ulumpi heruryava, ar oantes, tálala óse ilye máre nati heruryava. Sie orontes ar lende ana Aram-Naharáim, Náħaro ostonna.
	11 Ar tyarnes i ulumpi cuve undu i osto etsesse i lúmesse şinyeo, mí lúme yasse i nissi etelender calpien. 12 Ar quentes: “A Héru, Avraham herunyo Aino, lava yan cestan marta síra, ar á anta lisse Avraham herunyan. 13 Ela, táran ara i ehtele neno, ar i selyer i nerion i ostosse ettúlar calpien. 14 Etta tyara marta in i vende yenna quetin: Á mapa undu calpalya, mecin, ar lava nin suce, ar quetuvas: Suca, ar antauvan nén yú ulumpilyain – nai isse nauva ye asátiel núrolyan, Ísacen. Ar sie istuvan in atániel lisse herunyan.”

	10 And the servant took ten camels from among the camels of his lord, and he went away, bringing with him all good things of his master. Thus he arose and went to Aram-Naharaim, to Nahor's city.
	11 And he made the camels bow down at the outside of the city at the time of evening, at the time when the women went forth to scope up . 12 And he said: “O Lórd, Abraham my lord's God, let  that I seek happen today, and give grace to Abraham my lord. 13 Behold, I am standing by the fountain of water, and the daughters of the men in the city are coming out to draw water.  14 Therefore, cause  to happen that the maiden to whom I say: Take down your water-vessel, please, and let me drink, and she will say: Drink, and I will give water also to your camels – may she be  that you have reserved for your servant, for Isaac. And thus I will know that you have shown grace to my lord.”

	15 Ar túle, nó telyanes quete, i Revecca ettúle arwa calparyo to almorya; anes hínarya Vetuel yondorya Milca verirya Náħor, Avrahámo háno. 16 Ar i nessa nisso nemeste náne ita vanima; anes vende, lá sinwa lo nér. Ar ununtes i ehtelenna ar quantane calparya. Tá túles nan ama. 17 Ar i núro norne velien se ar quente: “Lava nin suce pitya lesta nenwa calpalyallo.” 18 Ar hé quente: “Suca, herunya,” ar lintave nampes calparya undu to máryanna ar láve sen suce. 19 Ar apa hé láve sen suce, hé quente: “Calpuvan yú ulumpilyain, tenna usúcielte ilqua ya marilte.” 20 Ar hé lende lintiénen ar ulyane ya náne calparyasse mir i nencolca, ar hé calpane ilye ulumperyain. 21 Ar i nér yente hé, nála quilda, istien qui i Héru carnelyane lendarya herenya hya lá. 

	15 And it came , before he completed speaking, that Rebekah came out having her water-vessel on her shoulder; she was the child of Bethuel son of Milkah wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother. 16 And the young woman's appearance was extremely beautiful; she was a virgin, not  known by man. And she went down to the wellspring and filled her water-vessel. Then she came back up. 17 And the servant ran to meet her and said: “Let me drink a small measure of water from your vessel.” 18 And she said: “Drink, my lord,” and quickly she took her vessel down to on her hand and allowed him to drink. 19 And after she allowed him to drink, she said: “I will scope up water also for your camels, until they have drunk everything that they want.” 20 And she went with quickness and poured what was in her vessel into the waterbox, and she scoped up  for all his camels. 21 And the man looked at her, being silent, to know if the Lórd had made his journey successful or not.

	22 Ar túle, íre i ulumpi pustaner suce, in i nér nampe corma maltava yó talme náne perina hyecel, ar *rancorma atta Revecco málimint, talmetta nála hyeceli maltava quean. 23 Ar quentes: “Mano selye nalye? Nyara nin, iquin. Ma ea nóme i coasse atarelyava yasse ece men sere ter i lóme?” 24  Ar hé quente: “Inye selyerya Vetuel yondorya Milca, ye coldes Náħoren.” 25 Yú hé quente: “Samilme esce ar úvea celvamatso véla, yú ea nóme yasse mo pole sere ter i lóme.” 26 Ar i nér nútane carya, ar lantanes undu epe i Héru. 27 Ar quentes: “Na aistana i Héru, Avraham herunyo Aino, ye ua ehehtie lisserya ar voronwerya herunyan, an íre inye náne i tiesse, i Héru ni-tulyane i coanna i nosseva herunyo.”
	28 Ar i vende norne ar nyarne amilleryo nossen pa quettar sine.

	22 And it came , when the camels stopped drinking, that the man took a ring of gold the weight of which was half a shekel, and two bracelets for Rebekah's wrists , their weight being ten shekels of gold. 23 And he said: “Whose daughter are you? Tell me, I pray. Is there a place in your father's house where it is possible for me to rest through the night?” 24 And she said: “I  the daughter of Bethuel son of Milkah, whom she bore to Nahor.” 25 Also she said: “We have straw and an abundance of animal fodder alike, also  is place where one may rest through the night.” 26 And the man lowered his head, and he fell down before the Lórd. 27 And he said: “Blessed be the Lórd, Abraham my lord's God, who did not abandon his grace and his faithfulness to my lord, for when I was on the way, the Lórd led me to the house of the kin of my lord.”
	28 And the maiden ran and told her mother's family about these words.

	29 Ar as Revecca enge háno yeo esse náne Lávan, ar Lávan norne etsenna i nerenna ara i ehtele. 30 Ar túle, íre cennes i corma ar i *rancormar néşaryo málimitse, ar íre hlasses Revecca néşaryo quettar: “Sin quente ninna i nér,” i lendes i nerenna. Ar yé, hé tárane ara i ulumpi ara i ehtele. 31 Ar eques: “Tula, elye ye aistana ná lo i Héru! Manen ná i táral i etsesse? An amanwien i coa, ar ea nóme i ulumpin.”
	32 Sie i nér túle mir i coa, ar *avaquiltanes i ulumpi, ar mo talle esce ar matso i ulumpin, ar nén sovien talyat ar i talu i nerion i enger óse. 33 Ar mo panyane nat matien epe se, mal quentes: “Uan matuva nó equétien ennenya.” Ar quentelte: “Queta!”

	29 And with Rebekah was a brother whose name was Laban, and Laban ran outside to the man by the wellspring, 30 And it came , when he saw the ring and the bracelets on his sister's wrists, and when he heard Rebekah his sister's words: “Thus the man spoke to me,” that he went to the man. And behold, he was standing by the wellspring. 31 And he said: “Come, you who are blessed by the Lórd! How is it that you are standing on the outside? For I have prepared the house, and there is room for the camels.”
	32 Thus the man came into the house, and he untied the camels, and one brought straw and fodder for the camels, and water for washing his feet and the feet of the men that were with him. 33 And one put something to eat before him, but he said: “I will not eat before I have spoken my errand.”  And they said: “Speak!”

	34 Ar quentes: “Nanye Avrahámo núro, 35 ar i Héru aistie herunya túrave, ar hé olólie alya. Ánies hén mámar ar lamári, ar telpe ar malta, ar hanwe ar inye móli, ar ulumpi ar *pellopor. 36 Ar ómu Sara, herunyo veri, náne yára coldes hén yondo, ar hé antauva i yondon ilqua ya hé same. 37 Etta herunya tyarne ni anta vandanya, quétala: Áva mapa veri yondonyan ho imíca i nissi i Canáanyaron,  ion nóresse máran. 38 Mal alye lelya atarinyo coanna ar nossenyanna, ar á mapa veri yondonyan. 39 Ar quenten herunyanna: Cé i nís ua mere hilya ni.  40 Mal quentes ninna: I Héru, epe ye vantan, mentauva valarya aselye ar caruva lendalya herenya, ar mapuval veri yondonyan ho mici nossenya, ar et atarinyo coallo. 41 Tá nauval léra vandanyallo, íre tuluval nossenyanna; yú qui ualte anta se lyen, nauval léra vandanyallo. 

	34 And he said: “I am Abraham's servant, 35 and the Lórd has blessed my lord greatly, and he has become grat. He has given him sheep and flocks, and silver and gold, and male and female thralls, and camels and donkeys. 36 And although Sarah, my lord's wife, was old she bore to him a son, and he will give the son everything that he has. 37 Therefore my lord caused me to give my oath, saying: Do not take a wife for my son from among the women of the Canaanites, in whose land I am dwelling. 

42 Ar túlen síra i ehtelenna, ar quenten: A Héru, Avraham herunyo Aino, qui sí acáriel herenya i lenda yasse nanye 43 – yé, táran ara i ehtele neno. Ar tyara marta in i vende ye ettúla calpien, yenna quetuvan: Ánin anta pitya lesta neno calpalyallo sucien, 44 ar quetuvas ninna: Alye suce, ar yú ulumpilyain calpuvan nén – isse ná i vende ye i Héru asátie herunyo yondon. 45 Ar íre ena quétanen endanyasse, Revecca ettúle arwa calparyo to almorya, ar ununtes i ehtelenna ar calpane. Ar quenten senna: Mecin, lava nin suce! 46 Ar lintiénen nampes calparya undu almoryallo, ar quentes: Suca, ar yú ulumpelyain antauvan nén! Sie suncen, ar yú i ulumpin antanes nén. 47 Ar maquenten senna, ar equen: Mano selye elye ná? Ar eques: Selyerya Vetuel, Náħaro yondo, ye Milca colde sen. Ar panyanen i corma nengwiryasse, ar i *rancormar máryatse. 48 Ar cumben ar lantane undu epe i Héru, ar aistanen i Héru, Avraham herunyo Aino, ye ni-mentanelyane i vanima tiesse mapien herunyo háno selye yondoryan. 49 Ar sí, qui tanuvalde lisse ar voronwe herunyan, nyara nin, ar qui lá, nyara nin, ar queruvan imne foryanna hya hyaryanna.” 

42 And I came today to the wellspring, and I said: O Lórd, Abraham my lord's God, if now you have made successful the journey on which I am 43– behold, I am standing by the wellspring of water. And cause to happen that the maiden that is coming out to scope water, to whom I will say: Give me a small measure of water from your vessel to drink, 44 and she will say to me: You drink, and also to your camels I will draw up water – she is the maiden that the Lórd has reserved for my lord's son. 45 And when I was still speaking in my heart, Rebekah came having her water-vessel on her shoulder, and she went down to the wellspring and scoped up . And I said to her: Please, let me drink! 46 And quickly  she took her vessel down from her shoulder, and she said: Drink, and also to your camels I will give water! Thus I drank, and also o the camels she gave water. 47 And I asked her, and I said: Whose daughter are you? And she said: The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milkah bore to him. And I put the ring in her nose, and the bracelets on her hands. 47 And I bowed and fell down before the Lórd, Abraham my lord's God, who had sent me on the right way to take my lord's brother's daughter for his son. 49 And now, if you will show grace and faithfulness to my lord, tell me, and if not, tell me, and I will turn myself right or left.”

	50 Tá Lávan ar Vetuel hanquentet: “I natto utúlie i Hérullo. Ece ment quete munta lyenna, mára hya urra. 51 Yé, Revecca ea epe lye; áse mapa ar mena, ar nai nauvas herulyo yondo veri, ve i Héru equétie.”  52 Ar túle, íre Avrahámo núro hlasse quettattar, i cumbes cemenna i Hérun. 53 Ar i núro ettalle veneli telpeva ar veneli maltava, ar larmali, ar antanéset Reveccan. Yú hánoryan ar amilleryan antanes mirwali. 54 Ar mantelte ar suncelte, isse ar i neri i enger óse, ar lemner ter i lóme. Ar orontelte i arinde, ar quentes: “Lava nin lelya herunyanna.” 55 Ono Revecco háno ar amil quenter: “Lava i venden lemya aselme ter réli, hya rí quean. Epeta menuvas.” 56 Mal quentes téna: “Ávani hepe, íre i Héru acárie lendanya herenya. Lava nin auta, menienyan herunyanna.” 57 Ar quentette: “Yaluvamme i vende, ar maquetuvamme senna.” 58 Ar yaldette Revecca ar quentet senna: “Ma menuvatye as nér sina?” Ar quentes: “Menuvan.” 

	50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered: “The matter has come from the Lórd. We can say nothing to you, good or bad. 51 Behold, Rebekah is before you; take her and go, and may she be your lord's sons's wife, as the Lórd has said.” 52 And it came , when Abraham's servant heard their words, that he bent to the earth to the Lórd. 53 And the servant brought out vessels of silver and vessels of gold, and garments, and gave them to Rebekah. Also to her brother and to her mother he gave precious things. 54 And they ate and they drank, he and the men that were with him, and tarried through the night. And they arose in the morning, and he said: “Let me go to my lord.” 55 But Rebekah's brother and mother said: “Let the maiden remain with us for some days, or ten days. Thereafter she will go.” 56 But he said to them: “Do not keep me, when the Lórd has made my journey successful. Let me go away, for me to go to my lord.” 57 And they  said: “We  will call the maiden, and we will ask her.” 58 And they called Rebekah and said to her: “Will you go with this man?” And she said: “I will go.”

	59 Sie mentanelte oa Revecca néşalta, ar *tyetinderya, ar Avrahámo núro ar neryar. 60 Ar aistanelte Revecca ar quenter senna: “Néşalma, nai nauvatye amil húmion *quaihúmion, ar nai indyotyar mapuvar i ando iva tevir te.” 61 Ar Rececca oronte, ar venderyar, ar onortanelte i ulumpi ar hilyaner i nér. Sie i núro talle Revecca óse ar oante.
	62 Ar Ísac túle ho Vëer-Laħai-Röi, an máranes Nehev·nóresse. 63 Íre Ísac etelende sanien i restasse ana şinye, ortanes henyat ar yente, ar yé, ulumpeli túlaner. 64 Ar Revecca ortane henyat, ar íre cennes Ísac, talantes undu i ulumpello. 65 Ar quentes i núronna: “Man ná nér sina vantala i restasse velien vi?” Ar i núro quente: “Náse herunya.” Tá Revecca nampe fanwarya ar tompexe. 
	66 Ar i núro nyarne Ísacen ilye i nati yar carnelyanes. 67 Ar Ísac talle se mir Sara amilleryo *lancoa, ar olles verirya. Ar Ísac méle se ar náne tiutana pa amillerya.

	59 Thus they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's sevant and his men. 60 And they blessed Rebekah and said to her: “Our sister, may you be mother of a thousand of myriads, and may your descendants seize the gate of those that hate them.” 61 And Rebekah arose, and her maidens, and they rode the camels and followed the man. Thus the servant brought Rebekah with him and went off.
	62 And Isaac came from Beer-Lahai-Roi, for he was dwelling in the land of Negeb. 63 When Isaac went out to think in the field towards evening, he lifted his eyes and looked, and behold, some camels were coming. 64 And Rebecca lifted her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she slid down from the camel. 65 And she said to the servant: “Who is this man walking in the field to meet us?” And the servant said: “He is my lord.” Then Rebecca took her veil and covered herself.
	66 And the servant told to Isaac all the things that he had done. 67 And Isaac brought her into Sarah his mother's tend, and she became his wife. And Isaac loved her and was comforted about his mother.

RANTA 25 
Ar Avraham nampe hyana veri, yeo esse náne Cetúra. 2 Ar hé colde sen Simran ar Yoxan ar Meran ar Miryan ar Yisvac ar Hyúaħ. 3 Ar Yoxan óne Hyeva ar Leran. Ar Lerano yondor náner Ahyurim ar Letusim ar Lëummim. 4 Ar Miryano yondor náner Éfa ar Éfer ar Ħanoc ar Avíra ar Eldáa. Ilye sine náner Cetúro indyor.

CHAPTER 25
And Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah. 2 And she bore to him Zimran and Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah. 3 And Jokshan begat Shevah and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim and Letushim and Leummin, 4 And the sons of Midian were Ephah and Epher and Hanoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these were Keturah's descendants.

	5 Mal Avraham antane ilqua ya sámes Ísacen. 6 Ar i yondoin i *ovession i enger as Avraham antane Avraham annali. Tá mentanéset oa Ísac yondoryallo, lan en coines, Rómenna, Ambarónanna. 7 Ar sine náner réryar i coiviéno Avrahámo ya coines: Loar lempe *otoquean ar tuxa. 8 Ar Avraham effirne mára yáriesse, yára apa quanta coivie, ar anes comyana lieryanna. 9 Ar Ísac ar Ismael yondoryar antaner sen sapsa i Macpela-rottosse, i restasse Efrono, Sóhar i Ħetyo yondo, ya caita epe Mamre – 10 i resta ya Avraham ñente i Ħetyallon. Tasse Avraham sáme sapsarya, as Sara verirya. 

	5 But Abraham gave everything that he had to Isaac. 6 And to the sons of the concubines that were with Abraham, Abraham gave some gifts. Then he sent them away from Isaac his son, while he still lived, to the east, to the orient. 7  And these were the days of the life of Abraham which he lived: A hundred and seventy-five years. 8 And Abraham expired in a good age, old after a full life, and he was gathered to his people. 9 And Isaac and Ishmael his sons gave him a grave in the Machpela cave, in the field of Ephron, Zohar the Hittite's son, which lies before Mamre – 10 the field that Abraham got from the Hittites. There Abraham had his grave, with Sarah his wife.

	11 Ar túle apa Avrahámo qualme in Eru aistane Ísac yondorya, ar Ísac márane ara Vëer-Laħai-Röi. 12 Ar sine nar i híni Ismaelo, Avrahámo yondo, i Háhar i Mirra, Saro mól, colde Avrahámen: 13 Sine nar i essi yondoron Ismaélo – esseltainen, *nónareltassen: Ismaélo minnóna náne Nevaiot; ente, Cerar ar Arvëel av Mivsam 14 ar Misma ar Lúma ar Massa, 15 Ħaral ar Téma, Yetur, Náfis ar Cérema. 16 Sine náner Ismaélo yondor, ar sine nar esseltar, mastoltainen ar *estolieltainen: turcor yunque lieltainen. 17 Ar sine nar i loar Ismaélo coivie: loar otso ar *nelequean ar tuxa, ar effirnes ar qualle, ar anes comyana lieryanna.
	18 Ar marnelte ho Ħavíla tenna Hyúr, ya caita epe Mirrandor, ve mo lelya Ahyurenna. Cildes vehte opo ilye hánoryar.

	11 And it came  after Abraham's death that God blessed Isaac his son, and Isaac was dwelling by Beer-Lahai-Roi. 12 And these are the children of Ishmael, Abraham's son, that Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's thrall, bore to Abraham: 13 These are the names of the sons of Ismael – by their names, in their generations: Ishmael's firstborn was Nebaioth, furthermore, Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam 14 and Mishma and Dumah and Massa, 15 Hadad and Tema, Jetur, Naphish and Kedemah. 16 These were Ishmael's sons, and these are their names, by their villages and by their encampments: twelve chiefs by their peoples. 17 And these are the years of Ishmael's life: one hundred and thirty-seven years, and he expired and died, and he was gathered to his people.
	18 And they dwelt from Havila as far as Shur, which lies before Egypt, as one goes towards Asshur. He chose a dwelling-place in front of all his brothers.

	19 Ar sine nar i híni Ísaco, Avrahámo yondo. Avraham óne Ísac. 20 Ar Ísac sáme loar *canaquen íre nampes insen ve verirya Revecca, selyerya Vetuel i Aramya ho Pandan-Aram, Lávan i Aramyo néşa.
	21 Ar Ísac carne arcande i Hérunna veriryan, an hé náne pen yáve. Ar i Héru hlasse arcanderya, ar Revecca verirya nostane.
	22 Ar i híni mahtaner quén i exenna enderyasse, ar quentes: “Qui sie ná, mana castanya coitien?” Ar lendes maquetien i Hérunna.

	19 And these are the children of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begat Isaac. 20 And Isaac had  forty years when he took to himself as his wife Rebekah, daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan-Aram, Laban the Aramean's sister. 
	21 And Isaac made petition to the Lórd for his wife, for she was without fruit . And the Lórd heard his petition, and Rebekah his wife conceived. 22 And the children fought one against the other in her midst, and she said: “If it is so, what is my reason for living?” And she went to ask the Lórd.

	23 Ar i Héru quente senna: “Nóre atta eat mónalyasse, ar liende atta nauvat hyárine mityalyallon. Ar er liende nauva polda lá i hyana liende, ar i amyára nauva núro i amnessan.”
	24 Ar íre i lúme túle sen colien, yé, enger onóni mónaryasse. 25 Ar i minya ettúle, carne quanda hroaryasse ve findelarma, ar antanelte sen i esse Ésau. 26 Ar epeta hánorya ettúle, márya mápala Ésauo *taltel, ar mo antane sen i esse Yácov. Ar Ísac sáme loar *enenquean íre anette nóne.

	23 And the Lórd said to her: “Two peoples are in your womb, and two folks will be split from your interior parts. And one folk shall be stronger than the other folk, and the older shall be a servant for the younger.”
	24 And when the time came for her to give birth, behold, there were twins in her womb. 25 And the first one came out, red on his entire body like a garment of hair, and they gave him the name Esau. 26 And thereafter his brother came out, his hand holding Esau's heel, and one gave him the name Jacob. And Isaac had  sixty years when they were born.

	27 Ar i seldor aller, ar Ésau olle nér hanyala roitie, nér i ravando, mal Yácov olle quilda nér ye marne *lancoassen. 28 Ar Ísac méle Ésau, an sie ñentes hráva hráve matien, mal Revecca méle Yácov.
	29 Ar Yácov cárane apsa, ar Ésau túle i ravandallo, ar anes saicelea. 30 Ar Ésau quente Yácovenna: “Lava nin mate i carnio – carne apsa sina – an nanye saicelea.” Etta mo estane se i essenen Erom (Carne). 
	31 Mal Yácov quente: “Minyave ánin vace minnónietya!” 32 Ar Ésau quente: “Yé, nanye coivie-lancasse! Tá manen i minnónie nin aşea ná?” 33 Ono Yácov quente: “Minyave ánin anta vandatya!” Ar hé antane sen vandarya ar vance minnónierya Yácoven.
	34 Ar Yácov antane Ésaun massa ar apsa *correliva, ar hé mante ar sunce ar oronte ar oante. Sie Ésau nattirne i minnónie.

	27 And the boys grew, and Esau became a man understanding hunting, a man of the wilderness, but Jacob became a quiet man who dwelt in tents. 28 And Isaac loved Esau, for thus he got flesh from wild animals to eat, but Rebekah loved Jacob.
	29 And Jacob was making cooked food, and Esau came from the wildernes, and he was famished. 30 And Esau said to Jacob: “Let me eat of the red – this red cooked food – for I am famished.” Therefore one called him by the name Edom (Red). 
	31 But Jacob said: “Firstly sell me your right as firstborn!” 32 And Esau said: “Behold, I am at the brink of life! Then how is the right as firstborn useful to me?” 33 But Jacob said: “First give me your oath!” And he gave him his oath and sold his right as firstborn to Jacob.
	34 And Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage  of lentils, and he ate and drank and got up and went off. Thus Esau despised the right as firstborn.

RANTA 26 
Ar enge an saicele i nóresse, apa i minya saicele mi réryar Avraham. Ar Ísac lende Avimelecenna, aran Filistyaron, mi Erar. 2 Ar i Héru tannexe sen, ar quentes: “Áva unta Mirrandorenna; mara i nóresse ya nyaruvan lyen. 3 Mara ve aiano nóre sinasse, ar euvan aselye, ar aistuvan lye, ar elyen ar erdelyan antauvan ilye nóri sine, ar tulcuvan i vanda ya antanen Avraham atarelyan, 4 ar caruvan erdelya rimba ve menelo tinwi, ar antauvan erdelyan ilye nóri sine, ar erdelyanen ilye cemeno lier aistuvar inte, 5 pan Avraham lastane ómanya ar hempe canwanyar, axaninyar, namnanyar ar şanyenyar.”

CHAPTER 26
And  was another famine in the land, after the first famine in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Abimelech, king of the Philistines, in Gerar. 2 And the Lórd showed himself to him, and he said: “Do not go down to Egypt; dwell in the land that I will tell you. 3 Dwell as a stranger in this land, and I will be with you, and I will bless you, and to you and to your seed I shall give all these lands, and I shall establish the oath that I gave to Abraham your father, 4 and I shall make your seed numerous as the stars of heaven, and I shall give your seed all these lands, and by your seed all peoples of earth will bless themselves, 5 since Abraham listened to my voice and kept my orders, my commandments, my statutes and my laws.”

	6 Ar Ísac márane Eraresse. 7 Ar i nómeo neri maquenter senna pa verirya, ar quentes: “Náse néşanya,” – an runces quetiello in verirya nás, “hya i neri i nómeo nahtuvar ni Reveccan, pan náse vanima nemestesse”. 8 Ar túle, apa anes tasse andave, in Avimelec aran Filistyaron yente etsenna ter lattin ar cenne Ísac sáma tunce lúme as Revecca verirya. 9 Av Avimelec yalde Ísac ar quente: “Yé, náse anwave verilya! Tá manen náne i quentel: Náse néşanya – ?” Ar Ísac quente senna: “Carnenyes pan sannen: Qui uan care sie, qualuvan castaryanen.” 10 Ar Avimelec quente: “Mana si ya acáriel men? Ancárima né in er imíca i lie caitumne as verilya, elye tálala cáma menna!” 11 Ar Avimelec canne quanda lieryan: “Ye appa nér sina hya verirya nauva nahtana!”

	6 And Isaac was dwelling in Gerar. 7 And the men of the place asked him about his wife, and he said: “She is my sister” – for he feared to say that she was  his wife, “or the men of the place will kill me for Rebekah, since she is beautiful in appearance.” 8 And it came , after he was there long, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked outside through a window and saw Isaac having a good time with Rebekah his wife. 9 And Abimelech summoned Isaach and said: “Behold, she is actually your wife! Then how was  that you said: She is my sister – ?” And Isaac said to him: “I did it since I thought: If I do not do so, I will die by reason of her.” 10 And Abimelech said: “What  this that you have done to us? Easy it was that one among the people was going to lie  with your wife, you bringing guilt upon us!” 11 And Abimelech commanded his entire people: “ who touches this man or his wife will be slain!” 

	12 Ar Ísac rende sana nóresse, ar ñentes mí imya loa lúr tuxa ambe, ar i Héru aistane se. 13 Ar i nér olle túra, ar alles ambe ar ambe, tenna olles ita túra. 14 Ar haryanes lamári mámaiva ar lamári yaxíva, ar rimbe núroli, ar i Filistyar *hrucenner se.
	15 Ilye i tampor yar ataryo núror sampelyaner mi réryar Avraham atarya i Filistyar *lilyanelyaner, ar quantelyaneltet astonen. 16 Ar Avimelec quente Ísacenna: “Mena mello, an nalye ita túra lá elme.” 17 Ar Ísac lenwente talo, ar ortanes *lancoarya i Erar-nandesse ar marne tasse.
	18 Ar Ísac sampe ata i tambor nenwa yar sampelyanelte mi réryar Avraham atarya, an i Filistyar *lilyanelyaner tai apa Avrahámo qualme. Ar estanes tai i imye essinen yar atarya antanelyane tain. 19 Ar Ísaco núror samper i nandesse, ar hirnelte tasse tampo coirea nenwa. 20 Mal Eraro mavari cóşer as Ísaco mavari, quetila: “I nén menya ná!” Ar antanes i tampon i esse Esec (Cos), pan cóşelte óse. 

	12 And Isaac sowed in that land, and he got in the same year a hundred times more, and the Lórd blesssed him. 13 And the man became rich, and he grew more and more, until he became extremely rich. 13 And he possessed flocks of sheep and flocks of cows, and numerous servants, and the Philistines envied him.
	15 All the wells that his father's servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father the Philistines had stopped them up, and they had filled them with dust. 16 And Abimelech said to Isaac: “Go from us, for you are extremely more rich than us.” 17 And Isaac departed from there, and he erected his tent in the valley of Gerar and dwelt there. 
	18 And Isaac dug again the wells that they had dug in the days of Abraham his father, for the Philistines had stopped them up after Abraham's death. And he called them by the same names that his father had given them. 19 And Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and they found there a well of living water. 20 But the shepherds of Gerar quarreled with Isaac's shepherds, saying: “The water is ours!” And he gave the well the name Esek (Quarrel), since they quarreled with him.

	21 Ar sampes hyana tampo, mal cóşelte yú pa sá. Ar antanes san i esse Sitna (Cotie). 22 Ar lendes oa talo, ar sampes hyana tampo, ar pa ta ualte cóşe. Ar antanes san i esse Rehovot, ar quentes: “An sí i Héru ánie ven yonda nóme, ar yavuvalve i nóresse.” 23 Ar lendes ama talo Vëer-Hyevanna. 24 Ar i Héru nemne sen i imya lómisse, ar quentes: “Inye Avraham atarelyo Aino. Áva ruce, an inye aselye ná, ar aistuvan lye, ar caruvan erdelya rimba, Avraham núronyo castanen.” 

	21 And he dug another well, but they quarreled about it as well. And he gave to it the name Sitna (Hostility). 22 And he went away from there, and he dug another well, and about that they did not quarrel. And he gave it the name Rehovoth, and he said: “For now the Lórd has given us a wide space, and we shall be fruitful in the land.” 23 And he went up from there to Beer-Sheba. 24 And the Lórd received him in the same night, and he said: “I am Abraham your father's God. Do not fear, for I am with you, and I shall bless you, and I shall make your seed numerous, by reason of Abraham my servant.”

	25 Ar carastanes *yangwa tasse, ar yaldes i Héruo essenen, ar ortanes *lancoarya tasse, ar mi sana nóme Ísaco núror samper tampo. 26 Tá Avimelec lende senna Erarello as Aħussat meldorya ar Pícol hosseryo turco. 27 Ar Ísac quente téna: “Manen ná i túlalde ninna, elde i tevir ni ar ementayer ni oa lello?” 28 Ar quentelte: “Ecénielme in i Héru ea aselye, ar quentelme: Nai euva vanda imbi ve, é imbi mé ar lyé, ar lava men tulca vére aselye, 29 in ual caruva ulco elmen, ve ualme appane lyé, ar ve acárielme lyen rie márie ar ementayer lye oa rainesse. Elye sí i Héruo aistana.” 30 Ar carnes tien meren, ar suncelte ar mantelte. 31 Ar orontelte arinyave mí arin, ar antaner vanda quén i exin, ar Ísac mentane te oa, ar oantelte sello rainesse. 
	32 Ar martane i imya auresse in Ísaco núror túler ar nyarner sen pa i tampo ya sampelyanelte, ar quentelte senna: “Ihírielme nén!” 33 Ar estanéses Hyeva. Etta i osto esse ná Vëer-Hyeva (Tampo Vandava) tenna ré sina.
	34 Ar íre Ésau sáme loar *canaquean, nampes insen ve veri Yúrit,Vëeri i Ħetyo selye, ar Vasemat, Élon i Ħetyo selye. 35 Mal tyarnette faireo sárie Ísac yo Reveccan.

	25 And he built an altar there, and he called by the name of the Lórd, and he put up his tent there, and in that place Isaac's servants dug a well. 26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath his friend and Pichol his army's chief. 27 And Isaac said to them: “How is  that you are coming to me, you that hate me and have sent me away from you?” 28 And they said: “We have seen that the Lórd is with you, and we said: Let there be an oath between us, indeed between us and you, and allow us to establish a covenant wih you, 29 that you will not do evil to us, like we did not touch you, and like we have done to you only good and have sent you away in peace. You  now the Lórd's blessed one.” 30 And he made for them a feast, and they drank and ate. 31 And they arose early in the morning, and gave an oath one to the others, and Isaac sent them away, and they went off from him in peace.
	32 And  happened on the same day that Isaac's servants came and told him about the well that they had dug, and they said to him: “We have found water!” 33 And he called it Sheva. Therefore the city's name is Beer-Sheva (Well of Oath) until this day.
	34 And when Esau had  forty years, he took to himself as wife Judith, Beeri the Hittite's daughter, and Basemath, Elon the Hittite's daughter. 35 But they  caused bitterness of spirit to Isaac and Rebecca.

RANTA 27 
Ar túle, íre Ísac náne yára ar henyat nánet acca néce cenieryan, i yaldes Ésau amyára yondorya ar quente senna: “Yonya!” Ar hé quente senna: “Sisse nanye.” 2 Ar quentes: “Yé sí, nanye yára. Uan ista qualmenyo ré. 3 Sí, mecin, á mapa carmatyar, vainoleltya ar quingatya, ar mena mir i ravanda, ar ñeta nin hráva hráve, 4 ar ánin care tyastima matta, taite ya melin, ar ása tala ninna matienyan, ecien feanyan aista lye nó qualuvan.” 

CHAPTER 27
And it came , when Isaac was old and his eyes were too dim for him to see, that he summoned Esau his oldest son and said to him: “My son!” And he said to him: “Here I am.” 2 And he said: “Behold now, I am old. I do not know the day of my death. 3 Now, please, take your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go into the wilderness, and get me wild meat, 4 and make me tasty food, such that I love, and bring it to me for me to eat, for my soul to be able to bless you before I shall die.”

	5 Mal Revecca hlárane íre Ísac carampe Ésau yondoryanna. Tá Ésau oante mir i ravanda roitien hravan talien. 6 Ar Revecca carampe Yácov yondoryanna, quétala: “Yé, hlassen ataretya quéta Ésau hánotyanna, quétala: 7 Ánin tala hráva hráve, ar ánin care tyastima matta. Sie matuvan ar aistuva tye nó qualmenya. 8 Mal sí, yonya, á lasta ómanya ar cara ve cánan tyen: 9 Mena sí i lamárenna, ar ánin tala talo eule atta i nyéniron, ar caruvanyet tyastima matta ataretyan, taite ve melis. 10 Tá taluvatyes ataretyanna matieryan, ar sie aistuvas tye nó qualmerya.” 11 Mal Yácov quente Revecca amilleryanna: “Yé, Ésau hánonya ná nér quanta findion, mal inye passa nér ná. 12 Cé atarinya appuva ni, ar nemuvan sen ve lengala yaiwenen, ar taluvan imninna hútie ar lá aistie.” 13 Ono amillerya quente senna: “Nai hútietya petuva ní i mende, yonya. Rie á lasta ómanya ar mena ar ánin ñete tu.”

	5 But Rebekah was hearing when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. Then Esau went off into the wilderness to hunt a wild animal to bring. 6 And Rebekah spoke to Jacob his son, saying: “Behold, I heard your father speak with Esau your brother, saying: 7 Bring me wild meat, and make me tasty food. Thus I will eat and will bless you before my death. 8 But now, my son, listen to my voice and do as I am bidding you: 9 Now go to the flock, and bring me from there two kids of the goats, and I will make them a tasty meal for your father, such as he loves. 10 Then you will bring it to your father for him to eat, and so he will bless you before his death.” 11 But Jacob said to Rebekah his mother: “Behold, Esau my brother is a man full of hairs, but I am a smooth man. 12 Maybe my father will touch me, and I will seem to him as behaving with scorn, and I shall bring upon myself a curse and not a blessing.” 13 But his mother said to him: “May your curse strike me instead, my son. Only listen to my voice and go and get me them .”

	14 Ar lendes ar ñente tu ar talle tu amilleryanna, ar amillerya carne tyastima matta, taite ve atarya méle. 15 Ar Revecca nampe i ammaire larmar Ésau amyára yondoryava, yar enger óse i coasse, ar panyanes tai to Yácov amnessa yondorya. 16 Ente, panyanes i helmar i eulion i nyéniron to Yácovo mát, ar to i passa ranta yahtyo. 17 Ar antanes i tyastima matta ar i massa yar manwanelyanes mir Yácov yondoryo má. 
	18 Ar túles ataryanna ar quente: “Atarinya!” Tá hé quente: “Sisse nanye. Man natye, yonya?” 19 Ar Ésau quente ataryanna: “Inye Ésau minnónatya. Acárien ve cannetye nin. Á orta, mecin, hama ar mata i hráva hráveo ya talan, ecien fealyan aista ni.” 

	14 And he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made tasty food, such as his father loved. 15 And Rebekah took the choicest garments of Esau her oldest son, which were with her in the house, and she put them on Jacob her oldest brother. 16 Furthermore, she put the skins of the kids of the goats on Jacob's hands, and on the smooth part of his neck. 17 And she gave the tasty food and the bread that she had prepared into Jacob her son's hand.
	18 And he came to his father and said: “My father!” Then he said: “Here I am. Who are you, my son?” 19 And Esau said to his father: “I  Esau your firstborn. I have done as you commanded me. Rise, please, sit and eat the wild meat that I bring, for your soul to be able to bless me.”

	20 Mal Ísac quente yondoryanna: “Manen ná in ihírietyes ta ron, yonya?” Ar hé quente: “I castanen in i Héru Ainotya mentane i hravan ninna.” 21 Ar Ísac quente Yácovenna: “Tula hare, mecin, ecien nin appa tye, yonya – istienyan qui é natye Ésau yondonya hya lá.” 22 Ar Yácov lende hare Ísac ataryanna, ar hé appane se, ar quente: “I óma ná Yácovo óma, mal i mát nát Ésauo mát.” 23 Ar hé ua hanyane man anes, pan máryat nánet quante findion ve Ésau hánoryo mát. Etta hé aistane se.
	24 Ar hé quente: “Ma é natye Ésau yondonya?” Ar quentes. “Nanye.” 25 Tá hé quente: “Ása tala hare ninna, ar matuvan i hrava hráveo ya yondonya atálie ninna, feanyo aistien tye.” Ar talles sa hare henna, ar hé mante, ar talles hén limpe, ar hé sunce.

	20 But Isaac said to his son: “How is  that you have found it that soon, my son?” And he said: “For the reason that the Lórd sent the beast to me.” 21 And Isaac said to Jacob: “Come near, please, for me to be able to touch you, my son – to know if you are indeed Esau my son or not.” 22 And Jacob went near to Isaak his son, and he touched him, and said: “The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are Esau's hands.” 23 And he did not understand who he was, since his hands were full of hairs like his brother Esau's hands. Therefore he blessed him.
	24 And he said: “Are you indeed Esau my brother?” And he said: “I am.” 25 The he said: “Bring it near to me, and I will eat the wild meat that my son has brought to me, for my soul to bless you.” And he brought it near to him, and he ate, and he brought him wine, and he drank.

	26 Ar Ísac atarya quente senna: “Tula hare sí, ar áni mique, yonya.” 27 Ar hé túle hare, ar hé minque se. Ar nusses larmaryo ne, ar aistanes hé ar quente: “Yé, i ne yondonyo ná ve i ne resto ya i Héru aistie! 28 Ar nai Eru antauva tyen rosseo menelo ar i láre nómion cemeno, ar úve oriva ar vinya limpeva! 29 Nai lier nauvar núrotyar ar liendi cuvuar tyen! Na heru hánotyaron, ar nai amilletyo yondor cuvuar tyen! Húna na ye húta tye, ar aistana na ye aista tye!”

	26 And Isaac his father said to him: “Come near now, and kiss me, my son.” 27 And he came near, and he kissed him. And he perceived the scent of his garment, and he blessed him and said: “Behold, the scent of my son is like the scent of a field that the Lórd has blessed! 28 And may God give you heaven's dew and of the rich places of earth, and an abundance of grain and new wine! 29 May peoples be your servants and folks bow to you! Be lord of your brothers, and may your mother's sons bow to you! Cursed be who curses you, and blessed be who blesses you!”

	30 Ar túle, apa Ísac telyane aista Yácov ar Yácov hehtanelyane atarya rie şinta lú yá, in Ésau hánorya nanwenne roitieryallo. 31 Ar yú isse carne tyastima matta ar talle sa ataryanna, ar quentes ataryanna: “Nai atarinya ortuva ar matuva i hráva hráveo ya yondorya tala, fealyo aistien ni.” 32 Ar Ísac atarya quente senna: “Man nalye?” Ar quentes: “Nanye yondotya, minnónatya – Ésau.” 33 Ar ita polda palie nampe Ísac, ar quentes: “Tá man náne isse ye ñentelyane hráva hráve ar talle sa ninna, ar amátien ho ilqua nó túletye, ar aistienyes? Aistana yú nauvas.”
	34 Íre Ésau hlasse ataryo quettar, yámes ita túra ar sára rambenen ar quente ataryanna: “Áni aista, yú ni, atarinya!” 35 Mal hé quente: “Hánotya túle finiénen ar nampe aistietya.” 36 Tá quentes: “Ma ta ua i casta esseryan Yácov? An amápies nómenya sina lú atta! Minnónienya nampes, ar yé, sí amápies aistienya!” 

	30 And  came , after Isaac completed blessing Jacob and Jacob had left his father just a short moment ago, that Esau his brother returned from his hunting. 31 And he as well made savoury food ar brought it to his father, and he said to his father: “May my father rise and eat of the wild meat that his son brings, for your soul to bless me.” 32 And Isaac his father said to him: “Who are you?”  And he said: “I am your son, your firstborn – Esau.” 33 And an extremely strong trembling seized Isaac, and he said: “Then who was he that got wild meat and brought it to me, and I have eaten from everything before you came, and I have blessed him? Blessed he will also be.” 34 When Esau heard his father's words, he cried with an extremly great and bitter cry and said to his father: “Bless me, me too, my father!” 35 But he said: “Your brother came with cunning and took your blessing.” 36 Then he said: “Is that not the reason for his name Jacob? For he has taken my place these two times! My right as firstborn he took, and behold, now he has taken my blessing!”

	Ar quentes: “Ma uatye asátie inyen aistie?” 37 Tá Ísac hanquente, ar eques Ésauenna: “Yé, acárienyes herutya, ar ilye hánotyar ánien sen ve núror, ar orinen ar vinya limpenen utulcienyes. Tá mana caruvan tyen, yonya?” 38 Mal Esau quente ataryanna: “Ma samitye rie er aistie, atarinya? Áni aista, yú ní, atarinya!” Ar Ésau ortane ómarya yaimesse.
	39 Ar Ísac atarya hanquente, ar eques senna: “Yé, oa cemeno láre nómellon nauva vehtetya, ar oa i rossello menelo or tye. 40 Ar maciletyanen coituvatye, ar nauvatye hánotyo núro. Mal tuluva, íre leryauvatye intye, i racuvatye yaltarya yahtetyallo.”

	And he said: Did you not set aside for me a blessing? 37 Then Isaac answered, and he said to Esau: “Behold, I have made him your lord, and all his brothers I have given him as servants, and with grain and with new wine I have established him. Then what am I to do for you, my son?” 38 But Esau said to his father: “Do you have only one blessing, my father? Bless me, me too, my father!” And Esau uplifted his voice in wailing.
	39 And Isaac his father ansered, and he said to him: “Behold, away from earth's rich places will be your dwelling, and away from the dew of heaven above you. 40 And by your sword you will live, and you will be your brother's servant. But it shall come , when you will liberate yourself, that you will break his yoke from your neck.”

	41 Ar Ésau téve Yácov castanen i aistiéno yanen atarya aistanelyane se. Ar Ésau quente endaryasse: “Ron tuluvar i rí naireva atarinyan. Tá nahtuvan Yácov hánonya!”
	42 Ar Ésau amyára yondoryo quettar náner nyárine Reveccan, ar mentanes ar yalde Yácov amnessa yondorya, ar quentes senna: “Yé, Ésau hánotya tiuta inse tyénen, an télas nahta tye. 42 Ar sí, yonya, á lasta ómanyanna, ar á orta; atye uşe Lávan hánonyanna mi Ħáran, 44 ar á lemya óse ter nótime réli, tenna hánotyo aha avánie – 45 tenna hánotyo rúşe equériexe oa tyello, ar uas ambe enyaluva ya acárietye sen. Tá mentauvan ar ñetuva tye talo. Manen ná i yúyo mici let nauvat nin vanwe mi er aure?”
	46 Ar Revecca quente Ísacenna: “Yeltan coivienya i Ħetye nissinen. Qui Yácov mapa veri ho imíca i Ħetye nissi, manan coituvan?”

	41 Ar Esau hated Jacob by reason of the blessing with which his father had blessed him. And Esau said in his heart: “Soon will come the days of grief for my father. Then I will kill Jacob my brother!”
	42 And Esau her older son's words were told to Rebekah, and she sent and called Jacob her youngest son, and said to him: “Behold, Esau your brother comforts himself by means of you, for he is intending to kill you. 42 And now, my son, listen to my voice, and rise; you flee to Laban my brother in Haran, 44 and remain there for a few days, until your brother's rage has passed – 45 until your brother's wrath has turned away from you, and he will no more recall what you have done to him. Then I shall send and get you from there. How is  that both among you shall be lost to me in one day?”
	46 And Rebekah said to Isaac: “I loathe my life because of  the Hittite women. If Jacob takes a wife from among the Hittite women, for what am I to live?”

RANTA 28 
Ar Ísac yalde Yácov ar aistane se ar canne sen, ar quentes senna: “Áva mapa veri ho i nissi Canáano. 2 Á orta, mena ana Pandan-aram, i coanna Vetuelwa, amilletyo atar, ar átyen talo mapa veri ho selyeryar Lávan, amilletyo háno. 3 Nai Eru Ilúvala aistuva tye ar caruva tye yavila ar rimba, olietyan liyúme liaiva. 4 Ar nai antauvas tyen i aistie Avrahanwa, tyen ar erdetyan asetye, i haryuvatye i nóre yasse maritye ve aiano, ya Eru antane Avrahámen.” 5 Tá Isac mentane Yácov oa, ar lendes Pandan-aramenna ana Lávan yondorya Vetuel i Aramya, hánorya Revecca, Yácov ar Ésauo amil.

CHAPTER 28
And Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, and he said to him: “Do not take a wife from the women of Canaan. 2 Rise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of Bethuel, your mother's father, and take for yourself from there a wife from the daughters of Laban, your mother's brother. 3 May God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and numerous, for you to become a multitude of peoples . 4 And may he give you the blessing of Abraham, to you and yo your seed with you, that you will possess the land where you dwell as a stranger, which God gave to Abraham.” 5 Then Isaac sent Jacob away, and he went to Paddan-aram to Laban the son of Bethuel the Aramean, brother of Rebekah, Jacob and Esau's mother.

	6 Sí Ésau cenne in Ísac aistanelyane Yácov ar mentane se oa Pandan-aramenna mapien insen veri talo, ar in íre aistanes hé cannes hén, quétala: “Áva mapa veri ho i nissi Canáano,” 7 ar i Yácov carnelyane ve atarya ar amillerya quenter ar oantelyane Pandan-Aramenna. 8 Ar Ésau hanyane in i Ħetye nissin uar fastane Ísac atarya. 9 Sie lendes Ismaelenna ar nampe inse ve veri Maħalat selyerya Ismael yondorya Avraham, Nevaioto néşa, ara noe veriryat.

	6 Now Esaw saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to Paddan-aram to take for himself a wife from there, and that when he blessed him he commanded him, saying: “Do not take a wife from the women of Canaan,” 7 and that Jacob had done as his father and his mother said had gone away to Paddan-Aram.  8 And Esau understood that the Hittite women did not please Isaac his father. 9 Thus he went to Ishmael and took for himself as a wife Mahalath daughter of Ishmael son of Abraham, Nebaiot's sister, beside his former wives .

	10 Mal Yácov oante Vëer-Hyevallo ar ménane Ħáranenna. 11 Ar túves nóme ar lemne tasse ter i lóme, ar nampes er i sarnion i nómeo ar panyane sa nu carya, ar caitunes sana nómesse humien. 12 Ar ólane sen, ar yé! *otyellie náne panyana cemende, ar ingarya rahtane menelenna, ar yé! Eruo vali lender ama ar undu sasse. 13 Ar yé! i Héru tarne or sa, ar quentes: “Inye i Héru, Avraham atarelyo Aino, ar Ísaco Aino. I nóre yasse cáyal, elyen antauvanyes, ar erdelyan. 14 Ar erdelya nauva ve cemeno asto, ar vintuval Númenna ar Rómenna ar Formenna ar Hyarmenna. Ar elyenen ilye cemeno nossi nauvar aistane. 15 Ar yé! euvan aselye, ar hepuvan lye ilya nómesse yasse lelyal, ar taluvan lye nan nóre sinanna, an uan hehtuva lye tenna acárien ta pa ya equétien lyenna.”

	10 But Jacob went away from Beer-Sheba and was going to Haran. 11 And he found a place and remained there through the night, and he took one of the stones of the place and put it under his head, and he lay down in that place to sleep. 12 And he dreamt, and behold! a ladder was placed on earth, and its top reached to heaven, and behold! God's angels went up and down on it. 13 And behold! the Lórd stood above it, and he said: “I  the Lórd, Abraham your father's God, and Isaac's God. The land where you are lying, to you I will give it, and to your seed. 14 And your seed shall be like the dust of the earth, and you will scatter westward and eastward and northward and southward. And by you all families of earth shall be blessed. 15 And behold! I will be with you, and I will keep you in every palce where you goi, and I shall bring you back to this land, for I will not abandon you until I have done that of which I have spoken to you.”

	16 Ar Yácov *eccuinune húmeryallo, ar quentes: “I Héru é ea mi nóme sina, ar inye ua sinte!” 17 Ar runces ar quente: “Mana rúcima nóme sina ná! Si ná munta hequa i coa Eruva, ar sisse ea menelo ando!”
	18 Ar Yácov oronte arinyave mí arin, ar nampes i sar ya panyanelyanes nu carya ar ortane sa ve tarma, ar ulyanes millo ingaryanna. 19 Ar antanes sana nómen i esse Vet-El (Coa Eruva), ómu i osto noa esse náne Lús.

	16 And Jacob awoke from his sleep, and he said: “The Lórd is in this place, and I did not know!” 17 And he feared and said: “How terrible this place is! This is nothing except the house of God, and here is heaven's gate!”
	18 And Jacob arose early in the morning, and he took the stone which he had put under his head and erected it as a pillar, and he poured oil upon its top. 19 And he gave to that place the name Bethel (House of God), although the city's former name was Luz.

	20 Ar Yácov antane vanda, quétala: “Qui Eru euva asinye, ar hepuvas ni mi sina tie yasse lelyan, ar antauvas nin massa matien ar larmar topien ni, 21 ar nanwenuvan i coanna atarinyava rainesse – tá i Héru nauva Ainonya, 22 ar sar sina, ya apánien ve tarma, nauva i Coa Eruva. Ar ho ilqua ya antal nin é antauvan quaista elyen.”

	20 And Jacob gave an oath, saying: “If God will be with me, and he will keep me on this way that I am going, and he will give me bread to eat and garments to cover me, 21 and I shall return to the house of my father in peace – then the Lórd shall be my God, 22 and this stone, that I have placed as a pillar, shall be the House of God. And from everything that you give me I shall indeed give a tenth to you.

RANTA 29 
Tá Yácov lende lintiénen ar túle i vehtenna i rómenya lieva. 2 Ar yentes, ar yé! enge tampo i restasse, ar yé! lamári nelde mámaiva cainer tasse ara sa. An ho sana tampo queni antaner nén i lamárin, ar i ondo ya caine i tampo assanna hoa né.  3 Ar tar ilye i lamári náner comyane, ar orquernelte i ondo oa i tampo assallo, antaner nén i mámain ar panyaner i ondo nan nómeryanna.
	4 Ar Yácov quente téna: “Hánonyar, mallo tulilde?” Ar quentelte: “Ħaranello tulilme.” 5 Ar quentes téna: “Ma istalde Lávan, Náħoro yondo?” Ar quentelte: “Istalmes.” 6 Ar quentes téna: “Ma háras máriesse?” Ar quentelte: “É háras máriesse – ar ela, Ráħel selyerya túla as i mámar!” 

CHAPTER 29  
Then Jacob went with speed and came to the dwelling-place of the eastern people. 2 And he looked, and behold!  was a well in the field, and behold! three flocks of sheep lay there beside it. For from that well people gave water to the flocks, and the stone that lay upon the well's opening was big. 3 And thither all the flocks were gathered, and they turned over the stone away from the well's opening, gave water to the sheep and put the stone back into its place.
	4 And Jacob spoke to them: “My brothers, from where do you come?” And they said: “From Haran we come.” 5 And he said to them: “Do you know Laban, Nahor's son?” And they said: “We know him.” 6 And he said to them: “It it well with him?”  And they said: “Indeed it is well – and look, Rachel his daugher is coming with the sheep!” 

	7 Ar eques: “Ela, Anar en tára ná, ar i lúme ua utúlie comyaven i celvar. Á anta nén i mámain, ar áte tulya nan nesselenna.” 8 Mal quentelte: “Ualme lerta caritas nó ilye i lamári nar comyane, ar querilte i ondo oa i tampo assallo. Tá antalme nén i mámain.”
	9 Lan en quétanes aselte, Ráħel túle as i mámar ataryava, an i vende mavar né. 10 Ar túle, íre Yácov cenne Ráħel selyerya Lávan, amilleryo háno, ar mámaryar Lávan amilleryo háno, i Yácov menne hare ar querne i ondo oa i tampo assallo, ar antanes nén i mámain Lávano, amilleryo háno. 11 Ar Yácov minque Ráħel, ar ortanes ómarya ar láve nieryain sire.

	7 And he said. “Look, the sun is still high, and the time has not come for gathering the animals. Give water to the sheep, and lead them back to pasture.” 8 But they said: “We may not do it before all the flocks are gathered, and they turn  the rock away from the well's opening. Then we give water to the sheep.”
	9 While he was stil speaking with them, Rachel came with the sheep of her father, for the maiden was a shepherd. 10 And it came , when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near and turned the stone away from the opening of the well, and he gave water to the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother. 11 And Jacob kissed Rachel, and he lifted up his voice and let his tears flow.

	12 Tá Yácov nyarne Ráħelen i nás ataryo rendo ar i nás Revecco yondo. Ar hé norne ar nyarne ataryan.
	13 Ar túle, íre Lávan hlasse i sinyar pa Yácov néşaryo yondo, i nornes velien se ar panyane rancuryat *os se ar minque se, ar talleses coaryanna. Ar hé nyarne Lávanen ilye sine nati. 14 Ar Lávan quente: “Nanwiesse nalye axonya ar hrávenya!” Ar hé marne óse ter quanta asta.
	15 Ar Lávan quente Yácovenna: “Rie pan nalye nossenyo, lau moluval nin muntan? Ánin nyare manen meril náve paityana.” 

	12 Then Jacob told to Rachel that he was  her father's kinsman and that he was  Rebekah's son. And she ran and told her father.
	13 And it came , when Laban heard the news about Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him and put his arms around him and kissed him, and he brought him to his house. And he told Laben all these things. 14 And Laban said: “In truth you are my bone and my flesh!” And he dwelt with him for a full month.
	15 And Laban said to Jacob: “Just since you are of my kin, surely you are not to work for me for nothing? Tell me how you want to be paid.

	16 Enget as Lávan selye atta; i amyáro esse náne Lea, ar i amnesso esse náne Ráħel. 17 Mal Leo hendu nánet milye, ono Ráħel sáme vanima canta ar vanima nemeste. 18 Ar Yácov méle Ráħel, ar quentes: “Moluvan lyen ter loar otso Ráħel amyára selyelyan.” 19 Ar Lávan quente: “Anta se lyen ná nin arya epe antave se hyana neren. Á lemya asinye.” 20 Tá Yácov móle ter loar otso ñetien  Ráħel, ar nemnelte sen ve rie nótime rí, i melmenen ya sámes hén.
	21 Ar Yácov quente Lávanna: “Ánin anta verinya tulienyan senna, an rényar nar quátine.” 22 Tá Lavan comyane ilye i neri i nómeo ar carne meren. 23 Ar túle i şinyesse i nampes Lea selyerya ar talle sé henna, ar hé mittane senna. 24 Ente, Lávan antane Silpa mólya Lean, náven selyeryo mól.

	16  were with Laban two daughers, and the eldest one's name was Leah, and the youngst one's name was Rachel. 17 But Leah's eyes were weak, but Rachel had a beautiful form and a beautiful appearence. 18 And Jacob loved Rachel, and he said: “I will serve you for  seven years for Rachel your oldest daughter.” 19 And Laban said: “To give her to you is for me better than giving her to another man. Remain with me.” 20 Then Jacob worked for seven years to get Rachel, and they seemed to him as only a few days, for the love that he had for her.
	21 Then Jacob said to Laban: “Give me my wife for me to come to her, for my days are filled.” 22 Then Laban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast. 23 And it came  in the evening that he took Leah his daughter and brought her to him, and he went in to her. 24 Furthermore, Laban gave Zilpah his thrall to Leah, to be his daughter's thrall.

	25 Ar martane i arinde i yé, anes Lea, ar Yácov quente Lávanna: “Mana acáriel nin? Ma uan móle lyen ñetien Ráħel? Manen ná in acáriel fintale sina nin?” 26 Ar Lávan quente: “Nómelmasse ua haime i mo verta i amnessa nó i minnóna. 27 Á telya i merendo ostola sinan, ar vertauvalme lyen yú i exe, i molien ya caruval nin ter an loar otso.” 28 Ar Yácov carne sie ar telyane i otsola Lean. Tá Lávan antane sen Ráħel selyerya ve veri. 29 Ente, Lávan antane Ráħelen Vilha mólya, náven selyeryo mól.

	25 And it happened in the morning that behold, she was Leah, and Jacob said to Laban: “What have you done to me? Did I not work for you to get Rachel? How is it that you have done this trick to me?” 26 And Laban said: “At our place it is not custom that one gives away the youngest in marriage before the firstborn. 27 Complete the week of feasting for this one, and I shall give in marriage to you also the other, for the work that you will do for me for another seven years.” 28 And Jacob did so and completed the week for Leah. Then Laban gave him Rachel his daughter as wife. 29 Furthermore, Laban gave to Rachel Bilha his thrall, to be his daughter's thrall.

	30 Ar Yácov túle yú Ráħelenna, ar méles Ráħel ambe lá Lea, mal molles Lávanen ter an loar otso. 31 Ar i Héru cenne i Lea náne tévaina, ar pantanes mónarya, lan Ráħel loitane nosta híni. 32 Mal Lea nostane ar colde yondo, ar antanes hén i esse Rëuven (Ela, yondo!), an quentes: “Amarties pan i Héru ecénie manen moian. An sí verunya meluva ni!”
	33 Ar nostanes ata ar colde yondo, ar quentes: “Amarties pan i Héru ahlárie i nanye tévaina. Tanen ánies nin yú yondo sina.” Ar antanes hén i esse Simeon.
	34 Ar nostanes ata ar colde yondo, ar quentes: “Lúme sina verunya tacuva inse ninna, pan ocólien sen yondor nelde.” Etta hé ñente i esse Lévi (Tácina).
	35 Ar nostanes ata ar colde yondo, ar quentes: “Lúme sina laituvan i Héru!” Etta antanes hén i esse Yehúra (Laitale). Tá pustanes cole híni.

	30 And Jacob came also to Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leah, but he worked for Laban for another seven years. 31 And the Lórd saw that Leah was being hated, and he opened her womb, while Rachel failed to conceive children. 32 But Leah conceived and bore a son, and she gave him the name Reuben (Look, a son!), for she said: “It has happened since the Lórd has seen how I am afflicted. For now my husband will love me!”
	33 And she conceived again and bore a son, and she said: “It has happeneed since the Lórd has heard that I am being hated. Therefore he has given me also this one.” And she gave him the name Simeon.
	34 And she conceived again and bore a son, and she said: “This time my husband will fasten himself to me, since I have borne to him three sons.” Therefore he got the name Levi (Fastened).
	35 And she conceived again and bore a son, and she said: “This time I will praise the Lórd!” Therefore she gave to him the name Judah (Praise). Then she stopped bearing children.

RANTA 30 
Íre Ráħel cenne i loitanes cole híni Yácoven, Ráħel *hrucenne néşarya, ar quentes Yácovenna: “Ánin anta híni, hya qualuvan!” 2 Ar Yácovo rúşe náne nartana Ráħelenna, ar quentes: “Ma ean i mende Eruo, ye váequétie tyen came móno yáve?” 3 Mal hé quente: “Yé Vilha mólinya! Á mitta senna, colieryan ránin. Sie yú inye nauva carastana ama sénen!” 4 Sie antanes Vilha mólya Yácoven ve veri, ar Yácov mittane henna. 5 Ar Vilha nostane ar colde Yácoven yondo. 6 Tá Ráħel quente: “Eru anámie ni, ar yú ahláries ómanya ar ánie nin yondo.” Etta antanes hén i esse Lán (Anámies).

CHAPTER 30
When Rachel saw that she failed to bear children to Jacob, Rachel envied her sister, and she said to Jacob: “Give me children, or I shall die!” 2 And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said: “Am I in God's stead,  who has denied you to receive fruit of womb?” 3 But she said: “Behold Bilha my thrall! Go in to her, for her to bear on my behalf. Thus I too will be built up by her!” 4 Thus she gave Bilha her thrall to Jacob as a wife, and Jacob went in to her. 5 And Bilha conceived and bore Jacob a son. 6 Then Rachel said: “God has judged me, and he has also heard my voice and has given me a son.” Therefore she gave him the name Dan (He Has Judged).

	7 Ar Vilha, Ráħelo mól, nostane ata ar colde Yácoven attea yondo. 8 Ar Ráħel quente: “Eruo mahtier amahtien as néşanya, ar yú sámen i apaire.” Ar antanes hén i esse Naftali (Mahtie).
	9 Íre Lea cenne in upusties cole, nampes Silpa mólya ar antane hé Yácoven ve veri. 10 Ar Silpa, Leo mól, colde Yácoven yondo. 11 Ar Lea quente: “Almiénen!” Ar antanes hén i esse Ár (Almie).
	12 Ar Silpa, Leo mól, colde Yácoven attea yondo. 13 Ar Lea quente: “Valima nanye! An i selyer estuvar ni valima!” Ar antanes hén i esse Ahyer (Valimie).

	7 And Bilha, Rachel's thrall, conceived and bore to Jacob a second son. 8 And Rachel said: “God's fights I have fought with my sister, and I also had the victory.” And she gave him the name Naphtali (Fighting).
	9 When Leah saw that she had  stopped bearing, she took Zilpah her thrall and gave her to Jacob as a wife. 10 And Zilpah, Leah's thrall, bore to Jacob a son. 11 And Leah said: “By good fortune!” And she gave him the name Gad (Good Fortune).
	12 And Zilpah, Leah's thrall, bore to Jacob a second son. 13 And Leah said: “Happy I am! For the daughters will call me happy!” And she gave him the name Asher (Happiness).

	14 Ar Reuven etelende mí rí yáviéno oriva ar hirne *hroaşundor i restasse, ar talle te Lea amilleryanna. Tá Ráħel quente Leanna: “Mecin, ánin anta et i *hroaşundollon yondotyo.” 15 Mal hé quente senna: “Ma ua farya in amápietye verunya, ar yú mapuval yondonyo *hroaşundor?” Tá Ráħel quente: “Etta caituvas asetye lóme sinasse, quaptalesse i hroaşundoiva yondotyo.”
	16 Íre Yácov túle i restallo i şinyesse, Lea etelende velien se, ar hé quente: “Ninna mauya tyen tule, an é amancien tye nin yondonyo *hroaşundoinen.” Ar caines as hé yana lómisse. 17 Ar  Eru lastane Leanna, ar hé nostane ar colde Yácoven lempea yondo.
	18 Ar Lea quente: “Eru apaitie nin, pan antanen mólinya verunyan.” Ar antanes i hínan i esse Issacar (Nér *Paityaléva).

	14 And Reuben went out in the day of the harvest of grain and found mandrakes in the field, and he brought them to Leah his mother. Then Rachel said to Leah: “Please, give me  of your son's mandrakes.” 15 But she said to her: “Is it not enough that you have taken my husband, and you will also take my son's mandrakes?” Then Rachel said: “Therefore he shall lie with you this night, in exchange for  the mandrakes of your son.”
	16 When Jacob came from the field in the evening, Leah went out to meet him, and she said: “ to me it is necessary for you to come, for I have indeed traded you to me with my son's mandrakes.” And he lay with her that night. 17 And God listened to Leah, and she conceived and bore to Jacob a fifth son.
	18 And Leah said: “God has paid me, since I gave my thrall to my husband.” And she gave the child the name Isssachar (Man of Payment).

	19 Ar Lea nostane ata, ar colde enquea yondon Yácoven. 20 Ar Lea quente: “Eru ánie nin mirwa anna. Sí verunya himyuva ninna, pan ocólien sen yondor enque.” Ar antanes i hínan i esse Sevulun (Himie).
	21 Ar epeta coldes selye, ar antanes hén i esse Lína.

	19 And Leah conceived again, and she bore a sixth son to Jacob. 20 And Leah said: “God has given me a precious gift. Now my husband will stick to me, since I have borne him six sons.” And she gave the child the name Zebulun (Sticking).
	21 And thereafter she bore a daughter, and she gave her the name Dinah.

	22 Tá Eru enyalde Ráħel, ar Eru hlasse se, ar pantanes mónarya. 23 Ar hé nostane ar colde yondo ar quente: “Eru amápie oa nucumnienya.” 24 Ar antanes i hínan i esse Yósef (Napanis), quétala: “Nai i Héru napanuva nin an yondo.”
	25 Ar túle, íre Ráħel coldelyane Yósef, i Yácov quente Lávanna: “Lava nin auta, menienyan vehtenyanna ar nórenyanna. 26 Ánin anta verinyat ar hínanyar in omólien lyen, ar lava nin lelya, an elye ista i molie yanen omólien lyen.” 27 Mal Lávan quente senna: “Nai ihírien lisse hendulyatse! Ecendien i tanwar, ar i Héru aistanelyane ni castalyanen.” 28 Ar quentes: “Queta mana paityuvan lyen, ar antauvan sa.” 

	22 Then God recalled Rachel, and God heard her, and he opened her womb. 23 And she conceived and bore a son and said: “God has taken away my humiliation.” 24 And she gave the child the name Joseph (He Adds), saying: “May the Lórd add to me another son.”
	25 And it came , when Rachel bore Joseph, that Jacob said to Laban: “Let me go away, for me to go to my dwelling-place and my country. 26 Give me my two wifes and my children for whom I have worked for you, and let me go, for you know the work that I have worked  for you.” 27 But Laban said to him: “Wish that I have found favor in your eyes! I have read the signs, and the Lórd has blessed me by reason of you.” 28 And he said: “Say what I am to pay you, and I will give it.”

	29 Ar hé quente senna: “Istal manen omólien lyen, ar mana amartie celvalyain asinye. 30 An sámel nótime celvar nó túlen, mal olólielte úvie, ar i Héru aistie lye apa tulessenya. Ar sí, mi mana lúme inye cimuva véra nossenya?” 31 Ar quentes: “Mana antauvan lyen?” Ar Yácov quente: “Ual antauva nin erya nat, qui caril nin si: Ata nauvan mavar lamárelyan, ar hepuvanyes. 32 Menuvan ter quanda lamárelya síra, mapala oa ilya máma arwa *picaron ar mottoron, ar ilya hróva celva imíca i mámar, ar i arwar *picaron ar mottoron imíca i nyénir. Té nauvar *paityalenya. 33 Sie failienya nauva armaronya ho sí, íre tulil ceşien *paityalenya ya euva epe lye: Ilya celva ye pene *picar ar mottor imíca i nyérir, ar ye ua hróva imica i mámar, ná pílina qui mo hire se asinye.” 

	29 And he said to him: “You know how I have worked for you, and what has happened to your animals with me. 30 For you had few animals before I came, but they have become abundant, and the Lórd has bless you after my coming. And now, in what time will I give heed to my own family?” 31 And he said: “What am I to give you?” And Jacob said: “You are not to give me a single thing, if you do for me this: Again I will be shepherd for your flock, and I will keep it. 32 I will go through your whole flock today, taking away every sheep having dots and color-patches, and every brown animal among the sheep, and those having dots and color-patches among the she-goats. They shall be my payment. 33 Thus my righteousness will be my witness from now , when you come to check on my payment which will be before you: Every animal that lacks dots and color-patches among the she-goats, and that is not brown among the sheep, is stolen if one finds it with me.”

	34 Ar eque Lávan: “Yé, nai nauva ve equétiel.” 35 Ar i imya auresse nampes oa i hanur i náner rimpine ar sámer mottor, ar ilye i nyénir i sámer *picar ar mottor, ilya celva ya sáme ninque hroaryasse, ar ilye i hróvar imíca i mámar – mal antaner te mannar yondoryaron. 36 Tá panyanes lenda aurion nelde imbe inse ar Yácov. Ar Yácov náne mavar i hyane lamárin Lávano.

	34 Ar Laban said: “Behold, may  be as you have said.” 35 And in the same day he took away the males that were streaked or had colorpatches, and all the she-goats that had dots and colorpatches, every animal that had white on its body, and all the dark ones among the sheep – but he gave them into the hands of his sons. 36 Then he put a journey of thee days between himself and Jacob. And Jacob was shepherd for the other flocks of Laban's.

	37 Ar Yácov nampe insen vandili virya tyulusseva ar cottuléva ar mapalinwa, ar *heltanes  ninqui rimpeli mi tai, cárala cénima i ninque ya enge i vandilissen. 38 Ar panyanes i vandili yar *heltanelyanes i nencolcassen yannar i lamári túler sucien, ar ñentelte yére íre túlelte sucien. 39 Ar pan i lamári ñenter yére íre cennelte i vandili, i mámar colder euler i náner rimpie ar arwe mottoron ar *picaron. 40 Ar i euler Yácov panyane satyave, mal tyarnes i mámar quere cendelelta i rimpeannar ar i hróvannar mici Lávano mámar. Sie ñentes vére lamáreryar, ar ua panyane tai uo as Lávano mámar. 41 Ar túle, quiquie i polde mámar náner yéresse, i Yácov panyane i vandili epe i mámaron hendu i nencolcassen, náveltan yéresse imíca i vandili.  42 Mal íre i mámar náner milye, uas panyane tai tasse. Sie i milyar oller Lávano, lan i poldar oller Yácovo. 43 Ar i nér olle ita, ita lára, ar sámes hoe lamári, ar inye ar hanwe móli, ar ulumpi ar *pellopor.

	37 And Jacob took to himself staffs of fresh poplar and hazel and planetree, and he bared some white stripes on them, making visible the white that was in the staffs. 38 And he put the straffs that he had peeled in the water-boxes to which the flocks came to drink, and they got  heat  when they came to drink. 39 And since the flocks got  heat when they saw the saffs, the sheep bore lambs that were striped and having patches and dots. 40 And the lambs Jacob put separately, but he cause the sheep to turn their face towards the striped ones and the dark ones among Laban's sheep. This he got his own flocks, and he did not put them together with Laban's sheep. 41 And it came , whenever the strong sheep were in heat, that Jacob put the staffs before the eyes of the sheep in the waterboxes, for them to be in heat among the staffs. 42 But when the sheep were weak, he did not put them there. Thus the weak ones became Laban's, while the strong ones became Jacob's. 43 And the man became very, very rich, and he had great flocks, and female and male thralls, and camels and asses.


RANTA 31 
Ar hlasses Lávano yondoron quettar, quétala: “Yácov amápie oa ilqua ya atarelva sáme, ar yallo atarelva sáme acáries quanda lar sina.” 2 Ar Yácov yente Lávano cendele, ar yé, únes nilda sen ve anes noave.
	3 Ar i Héru quente Yácovenna: “Nanwena atarelyaron nórenna ar nosselyanna, ar euvan aselye.” 

CHAPTER 31
And he heard Laban's sons' words, saying: “Jacob has taken away everything that our father had, and from what our father had he has made all this wealth.” 2 And Jacob looked at Laban's face, and behold, it  was not friendly to him as it  was formerly. 
	3 And the Lórd said to Jacob: “Return to the land of your fathers and to your kin, and I shall be with you.”

	4 Ar Yácov mentane ar yalde Ráħel ar Lea i restanna, lamáreryanna, 5 ar quentes túna: “Cénan ataresto cendele, in uas nilda nin ve noave. Mal atarinyo Aino engie asinye. 6 Ar istaste manen quanda melehtenyanen omólien atarestan, 7 mal ataresta elengie nin yaiwenen, ar vistane *paityalenya lúr quean! Ono Eru ua láve sen mala ni. 8 Qui quentes: Té arwe *picaron nauvar *paityalelya, tá i quanda lamáre colde euli arwa *picaron, ar qui quentes: I rimpear nauvar *paityalelya, tá i quanda lamáre colde rimpie euli. 9 Sie Eru amápie oa ataresto celvar, ar ánies te nin. 10 Ar túle, mí lúme yasse i lamáre náne yéresse, in ortanen hendunyat ar cenne mi olos, ar yé! i camor i camper i lamárenna náner rimpie, arwe mottoron ar tehtion. 11 Ar Eruo vala quente nin i oloresse: Yácov!, ar quenten: Sís nanye! 12 Ar quentes: Á orta hendulyat, mecin, ar cena: Ilye i camor i capir i lamárenna nar rimpie, arwe mottoron ar tehtion. An ecénien ilqua ya Lavan acárie lyen. 13 Inye i Aino ho Vétel, yasse ortanel tarma ar yasse carnel nin vanda. Sí á orta, mena nóre sinallo, ar nanwena i nórenna yasse anel nóna.” 

	4 And Jacob sent and summoned Rachel and Leah to the field, to his flock, 5 and he said to them: “I am seeing your father's face, that it  is not friendly to me as formerly. But my father's God has been with me. 6 And you know how with all my might I have worked for your father, 7 but your father has behaved towards me with scorn, and he changed my pay ten times! But God did not allow him to harm me. 8 If he said: The ones  having dots will be your pay, then the whole flock bore lambs having dots, and if he said: The striped ones will be your pay, then the whole flock bore striped lambs. 9 Thus God took away your father's animals, and he has given them to me. 10 And it came , in the time when the flock was in heat, that I raised my eyes and saw in a dream, and behold! the rams that leaped on the flock were striped, having patches and spots. 11 And God's angel said to me in the dream: Jacob!, and I said: Here I am! 12 And he said: Raise your eyes, please, and see: All the rams that leap on the flock are striped, having patches and spots. For I have seen everything that Laban has done to you. 13 I  the God from Bethel, where you erected a pillar and where you made me a vow. Now rise, go from this land, and return to the land where you were born.”

	14 Ar Ráħel ar Lea quenter senna hanquentasse: “Ma en ea emmen masse hya ranta ve aryoni i coasse ataremmava? 15 Ma uamme nótime lo sé ve ettelear? An avácies met, ar yú ammáties i telpe ya ñentes ment. 16 An i quanda lar ya Eru amápie oa ho ataremma, ta véralva ná, ar hínalvava. Ar sí, ilqua ya Eru equétie tyen, cara ta!” 
	17 Tá Yácov oronte, ar panyanes yondoryar ar veriryar to i ulumpi, 18 ar talles óse ilye celvaryar ar ilye armaryar yar comyanelyanes – i celvar yar ñentelyanes, i comyanes mi Pandan-aram – menien ataryanna, Canáan·nórenna. 

	14 And Rachel and Leah said to him in answer: “Is  still for us  portion or part as heirs in the house of our father? 15 Are we not counted by him as foreigners? For he has sold us, ana he as also consumed the money that he got for us. 16 For the whole wealth that God has taken away from our father, that is our own, and our children's.  And now, everything that God has said to you, do that!”
	17 Then Jacob arose, and he put his sons and his wives on the camels, 18 and he brought with him all his animals and all his goods that he had gathered – the animals that he had got,  that he gathered in Paddan-aram – to go to his father, to the land of Canaan. 

	19 Sí Lávan lendelyane oa hocirien mámaryaron tó, ar Ráħel pilde i coacordoni yar atarya sáme. 20 Ar Yácov lengane fintalénen Lávan i Aramyan, lá nyariénen hén i uşumnes. 
	21 Sie úşes, isse ar ilqua ya sámes, ar orontes ar lahtane i Síre, ar ménanes ana i ambuna nórie Ileáro.
	22 Ar i neldea auresse nyárina né Lávanen i Yácov úşelyane. 23 Tá talles rendoryar óse ar roitane apa hé lenda ríon otso, ar rahtanes henna i ambuna nóriesse Ileáro. 24 Mal Eru túle Lávan i Aramyanna mi olos i lómio ar quente senna: “Cima imle, lá quetien Yácovenna márie hya ulco véla.”

	19 Now Laban had gone away to shear the wool of his sheep, and Rachel stole the house-idols that her father had. 20 And Jacob behaved with a trick towards Laban the Aramean, by not telling him that he was going to flee.
	21 Thus he fled, he and everything that he had, and he stood up and passed the River, and he was going towards the hilly country of Gilead.
	22 And on the third day  was told to Laban that Jacob had fled. 23 Then he brought his kindsmen with him and pursued after him a journey of seven days, and he reached him in the hilly country of Gilead. 24 But God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream and said to him: “Give heed to yourself, so as not to say to Jacob good or evil alike.”

	25 Ar Lávan rahtane Yácovenna apa Yácov ortane *lancoarya i ambuna ménasse, ar Lávan ar rendoryar ortanelyaner *lancoalta mí ambuna nórie Ileáro. 26 Ar Lávan quente Yácovenna: “Mana acáriel, lengala nin fintalénen, ar colila oa selyenyar ve au anette mandosse macilden? 27 Mana castalya uşien nuldave lan hépanel ni i morniesse, pan ual nyarne nin? Au carnel, mentauvanen lye oa as alasse ar líri, lapumbanen ar ñandenen! 28 Ual láve nin mique indyonyar ar selyenyar. Sí acáriel alasaila nat. 29 Ece nin mala lye, mal atarelyo Aino carampe ninna i vanwa lómisse, quétala: Cima imle, lá quetien Yácovenna márie hya ulco véla. 28 Mal sí, íre é oantiel pan ita milyal atarelyo nosse, mana castalya pilien ainonyar?”

	25 And Laban reached Jacob after Jacob erected his tent in the hilly region, and Laban and his brothers had erected their tent in the hilly country of Gilead. 26 And Laban said to Jacob: “What have you done, behaving towards me with a trick, and carrying away my daughters as if they were in custody by sword?  27 What is your reason for fleeing secretly while you were keeping me in the dark, since you did not tell me? If you did, I was going to send you away with joy and songs, with drum and harp! 28 You did not allow me to kiss my grandsons and daughters . Now you have done an unwise thing. 29 It is possible for me to harm you, but your father's God spoke to me in the bygone night, saying: Give heed to yourself, so as not to say to Jacob good or evil alike. 28 But now, when you have indeed gone off since you greatly long for your father's family, what is your reason for stealing my gods?”

	31 Ar hanquentasse Yácov quente Lávanna: “Carnenyes pan rúcanen. An sannen i qui uan carne sie, rapumnel selyelyar nillo. 32 As ye hiril ainolyar, isse ua coituva. Epe rendongwar ceşa ya samin, ar ályen mapa haryanar.” An Yácov ua sinte i Ráħel pildelyane tai. 33 Ar Yácov lende mir *lancoarya Yácov, ar mir lancoarya Lea, ar mir i inye mól atto *lancoa, mal hirnes munta. Ar túles et Leo *lancoallo ar lende mir Ráħelo *lancoa.
	34 Ono Ráħel nampelyane i coacordoni ar panyanelyane tai i ulumpeo sondanirwasse, ar háranes tais. Ar Lávan cenşe i quanda *lancoa, mal hirne munta. 35 Ar Ráħel quente ataryanna: “Nai herunya lá nauva rúşea pan lá ece nin orta epe tye, an nission lé ninna ná.” Ar cenşes, mal uas hirne i coacordoni.

	34 But Rachel had taken the house-idols and had put them in the camel's seat-cushion, and she was sitting on them. And Laban searched the whole tent, but found nothing. 35 And Rachel said to her father: “May my lord not be angry since it is not possible for me to rise before you, for the way of women  is upon me.” And he searched, but he did not find the house-idols.

	36 Tá Yácov olle rúşea, ar cóşe as Lávan. É ortanes ómarya ar quente Lávanna: “Mana ongwenya, mana úcarinya, pan oroitiel ni? 37 Sí íre ecéşiel ilye armanyar, mana ihíriel ilya coalyallo? Ása panya sisse epe rendonyar ar rendolyar, ar namuvalte imbe vet! 38 Ter sine loar *yúquean anaien aselye. Mámalyar ar nyérilyar uar ocólie qualine euler, ar i camor lamárelyo uan amátie. 39 Ya náne narcana lo hravani uan talle lyenna. Inye tompe ya náverya vanwa tuvune. Tyarnel ni paitya ilya vanwa celvan, pílina auresse hya pílina lómisse. 40 Tasse anen – i úre ni-mátane auresse ar i nixe lómisse, ar húme úşe hendunyalto. 41 Ter sine loar *yúquean anaien as nosselya. Mólen lyen ter loar canaque selyelya attan, ar loar enque lamárelyan, ar vistanel *paityalenya lúr quean. 42 Au úne inyen atarinyo Aino, Avrahámo Aino ar Ísaco Rucie, sí mentanel ni oa arwa munto! Mal Eru ecénie manen omoien ar manen irícien mányanten, ar i vanwa lómisse namnes.”

	36 Then Jacob became angry, and he quarreled with Laban. Indeed he raised his voice and said to Laban: “What is my crime, what is my sin, since you have pursued me? 37 Now when you have searched all my goods, what have you found from all your house? Put it here before my kinsmen and your kinsmen, and they will judge between us! 38 For  twenty years I have been with you. Your sheep and your she-goats have not carried dead lambs, and the rams of your flock I have not eaten. 38 What was torn by beasts I did not bring to you. I covered what its being lost cost. You made me pay for every lost animal, stolen by day or stolen by night. 40 There I was – the heat was eating me by day and the frost by night, and sleep fled from my eyes. 41 For these twenty years I have been with your kin. I worked for you for fourteen years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock, and you changed my pay ten times. 42 If my father's God, Abraham's God and Isaac's Fear, was not for me, you now sent me away having nothing! But God has seen how I have been afflicted and how I have striven with my hands, and in the bygone night he passed judgment.”  
	
	42 Ar hanquentasse Lávan quente Yácovenna: “I selyer nar ninye selyer, ar i híni nar ninye híni, ar i lamári nar ninye lamári, é ilqua ya cénal ninya ná. Ar selyenyar – mana caruvan tún síra, hya i hínin i ocóliette? 44 Mal tula sí, ar tulcuvangwe vére, inye ar elye, ar nai nauvas astarmo imbe ní ar lyé.”
	45 Ar Yácov nampe sar ar ortane sa ve tarma. 46 Ar Yácov quente rendoryannar: “Á comya sarni!” Sie comyanelte sarni ar carner cúme, ar mantelte tasse ara i cúme. 47 Ar Lávan estane sa Yehar-Saharúta, mal Yácov estane sa Alér (Cúme Astarmova). 48 Ar Lávan quente: “Cúme sina astarmo ná imbe ní ar lyé aure sinasse.” Etta sá ñente i esse Alér 49 ar Mispa (Tirion), an quentes: “Nai i Héru tiruva imbe ní ar lyé, íre nangwe oa quén i exello. 50 Qui lumnuval selyenyain, ar qui veryuval hyane nissennar ara selyenyar – ómu lá euva atan asengwe, yé, Eru nauva astarmo imbe ní ar lyé.” 

	42 And in answer Laban said to Jacob: “The daughers are my daughers, and the children are my children, and the flocks are my flocks, indeed everything that you are seeing is mine. And my daughters – what can I do for them today, or for the children that they have borne? 44 But come now, and we will establish a coventant, I and you, and may it be a witness between me and you.”
	45 And Jacob took a stone and erected it as a pillar. 46 And Jacob said to his kinsmen: “Gather stones!” Thus they gathered stones and made a heap, and they ate there by the mound. 47 And Laban named it Jegar-Sahadutha, but Jacob named it Galeed (Heap of Witness) 48 And Laban said: “This heap is a witness between me and you on this day.” Therefore it got the name Galeed 49 and Mizpah (Watchtower), for he said: “May the Lórd watch between me and you, when we are away one from the other. 50 If you will oppress my daughters, and if you will get married to other women beside my daughters – though there is not  man with us, behold, God will be a witness between me and you.”

51 Ar Lavan quente Yácovenna: “Ela cúme sina, ar ela i tarma ya apánien imbe ní ar lyé! 52 Cúme sina na nauva astarmo, ar i tarma na nauva astarmo, in inye ua lahtuva cúme sina lyenna, ar in elye ua lahtuva cúme sina ar tarma sina ninna, telila ulco. 53 Nai Avrahámo Aino ar Náħoro Aino, ataretto Aino, namuva imbe vet!” Ar Yácov antane vandarya Ísac ataryo Ruciénen.
	55 Ar Yácov talle *yanca i ambuna nóriesse, ar yaldes rendoryar matien massa. Sie mantelte massa ar lemner ter i lóme i ambuna ménasse. 56 Ar Lávan oronte arinyave mí arin, ar minques indyoryar ar selyeryar ar aistane te. Tá Lávan oante ar nanwenne vehteryanna.

51 And Laban said to Jacob: “Behold this heap, and behold the pillar that I have put between me and you! 52 This heap be a witness, and the pillar be a witness, that I shall not pass this heap to you, and that you will not pass this heap and this pillar to me, intending evil. 53 May Abraham's God and Nahor's God, their fathers' God, judge between us!” And Jacob gave his oath by Isaac his father's Fear.
	55 And Jacob brought a sacrifice in the hilly country, and he invited his kinsmen to eat bread. Thus they ate bread and remaiend through the night in the hilly country. 56 And Laban arose early in the morning, and he killes his grandsons and his daughters and blessed them. Then Laban went off and returned to his homeland.

RANTA 32  
Ar Yácov lende tieryasse, ar Eruo vali velder se. 2 Íre cenneset, Yácov quente: “Si Eruo *estolie ná.” Ar antanes sana nómen i esse Maħanáim (*Estoliet). 
	3 Ar Yácóv mentane tercánoli epe se Sëir·nórenna, Eromo resta. 4 Ar cannes tien, quétala: “Queta si Ésau herunyanna: Sin equétie Yácov: Ambárien as Lávan ar anaien tasse tenna sí. 5 Ar samin yaxi ar *pellopor ar mámar, ar hanwe ar inye móli, ar ementayen nyarien herunyan, hirien lisse hendulyatse.”
	6 Ar i tercánor nanwenner Yácovenna, quétala: “Túlelme hánolyanna, Ésauenna. Ente, túlas velien lye, ar neri tuxar canta óse.”

CHAPTER 32
And Jacob went on his way, and God's angels met him. 2 When he saw them, Jacob said: “This is God's camp.” And he gave to that place the name Mahanaim (Double Camp).
	3 And Jacob sent some heralds before him to the land of Seir, the field of Edom. 4 And he commanded them, saying: “Say this to Esau my brother: So Jacob has said: I have dwelt with Laban and I have been there until now. 5 And I have cows and donkeys and sheep, and male and female thralls, and I have sent to tell my lord, to find favor in your eyes.”
	6 And the heralds returned to Jacob, saying: “We came to your brohter, to Esau. Furthermore, he is coming to meet you, and four hundred men with him.”

	8 Tá Yácov ita runce ar náne şangiesse. Ar hyarnes i lie ya enge óse, ar i yaxir, ar i mámar, ar i ulumpi, mir *estolie atta. 9 Ar quentes: “Qui Ésau tule er *estolienna ar petises, tá i lemyala *estolie uşuva.” 10 Ar Yácov quente: “A Aino Avraham atarinyo ar Aino Ísac atarinyo, a Héru ye quente ninna: Nanwena nórelyanna ar nosselyanna ar caruvan márie lyen: 11 Inye ua valda ilye i mánain ar ilya i voronwen yar atániel núrolyan, an sámen rie vandilinya íre lahtanen Yordan sina, ar sí olólien *estolie atta. 12 Áni etelehta, mecin, ho hánonyo má, ho Ésauo má, an rucin sello, i tuluvas ar petuva ni, amil ar híni véla. 13 Ar elye quente: Caruvan márie lyen, ar caruvan erdelya ve earo litse, ya únótima ná liyúmeryanen.”

	8 Then Jacob greatly feared and was in tribulation. And he split the people that were with him, and the cows, and the sheep, and the camels, into two camps. 9 And he said: “If Esawu comes upon one camp and he smites it, then the remaining camp will flee.” 10 And Jacob said: “O God of Abraham my father and God of Isaac my father, o Lórd who said to me: Return to your land and to your kin and I shall do good to you: 11 I am not worthy of  all the boons and all the faithfulness you have  shown your servant, for I had only my staff when I crossed this Jordan, and now I have become two camps. 12 Deliver me, please, from my brother's hand, from Esau's hand, for I fear him, that he will come and strike me, mother and children alike. 13 And you said: I shall do good to you, and I will make your seed like the sand of the sea, which is uncountable for its multitude.”

	14 Ar lemnes tasse ter i lóme, ar nampes celvali illon sámes óse ve anna Ésau hánoryan: 15 nyénir tuxa atta ar hanwe yaci *yúquean, mámar tuxa atta ar camor *yúquean, 16 ulumpi *nelequean i antaner ilin ar nessaltar, yaxir *canaquean ar mondor quean, *pellopi *yúquean ar *pellopor quean. 17 Ar antanes te mannar núroryaron, combe apa combe celvaiva, ilya combe satyave. Tá quentes núroryannar: “Á lahta epe ni, ar á panya nóme imbi combe ar combe.”  18 Ar cannes i minya núron, quétala: “Íre Ésau hánonya vele lye ar maquete lyenna: Mano núro nalye, ar manna ménal, ar man harya celvar sine epe lye? 19 – tá alye quete: Yácov núrolya harya te. Si ná anna mentaina herunyanna, Ésauenna. Ar yé, yú issse túla ca me.”

	14 And he remained there through the night, and he took some animals from  that he had with him as a gift for Esau his brother: 15 two hundred she-goats and twenty male goats,two hundred sheep and twenty rams, 16 thirty camels that gave milk and their young, forty cows and ten oxen, twenty female donkeys and ten male donkeys. 17 And he gave them into the hands of his servants, group after group of animals, every group separately. Then he said to his servants: “Pass before me, and put space between group and group.” 18 And he commanded the first servant, saying: “When Esau your brother meets you and asks you: Whose servant are you, and where are you going, and who owns these animals before you?” 19 – then you are to say: Jacob your servant owns them. This is a gift being sent to my lord, to Esau. And behold, he himself is coming behind us.”  

	20 Ar cannes yú i attean, ar i nelyan, ar illin i hilyaner i combor celvaiva, quétala: “Sie alde quete Ésauenna íre hiruvaldes, 21 ar queta: Ente, yé, Yácov núrolya túla ca me.” An sannes: “Cestuvan raine óse i annanen ya mene epe ni; ar epeta tuluvan epe senna. Cé ni-camuvas nildave.”
	22 Ar i anna lahtane olla epe se, mal isse lemne ter i lóme i *estoliesse. 23 Ar orontes yana lómisse ar talle verirya atta ar inya mólya atta ar hínaryar minque ar lahtane i tarna sé Yappoc. 24 Ar nampeset ar mentane te olla i síre.

	20 And he commanded also the second, and the third, and all that followed the groups of animals, saying: “Thus you are to speak to Esau when you shall find him, 21 and say: Moreover, behold, Jacob your servant is coming behind us.” For he thought: “I shall seek peace with him by the gift that goes before me, and thereafter I shall come before him. Perhaps be will receive me in a friendly manner.”
	22 And the gift passed over before him, but he himself remained through the night in the camp. 23 And he arose in that night and brough his two wives and their two female thralls and their eleven children and passed the ford Jabbok. 24 And he took them and sent them over the river.

	25 Ar lemnes tasse erinqua. Tá nér mahtane óse tenna aure túle. 26 Ar íre hé cenne i hé ua  turune se, hé ampe oşweryo unque, ar Yácovo oşweo unque náne et oxallo lan mahteánes as hé. 27 Ar hé quente: “Lava nin auta, an ára túla!” Mal quentes: “Uan lavuva lyen auta láqui aistal ni!”
	28 Ar hé quente senna: “Mana esselya?” Ar quentes: “Yácov.” 29 Ar hé quente: “Esselya ua ambe nauva Yácov, mal Israel, an iríciel as Eru ar as atani, ar acámiel i apaire.” 30 Ar Yácov maquente senna: “Ánin nyare, mecin, esselya.” Mal hé quente: “Manen ná i maquétal pa essenya?” Ar hé aistane se tasse.
	Ar Yácov antane sana nómen i esse Peniel (Eruo Cendele), “an ecénien Eru cendelello cendelenna, ananta nanye en coirea.” 32 Ar Anar oronte senna íre lahtanes Peniel, mal castanen oşweryo uas vantane aryúlime *patainen. 33 Etta Israelindi tenna aure sina uar mate i tiuco tuo ya ea i oşweo unquesse, pan hé ampe Yávoco oşweo unque, é i tiuco tuo. 

	25 And he remained there alone. Then a man fought with him until day came. 26 And when that one saw that he did not conquer him, he touched the hollow  of his hip, and the hollow of Jacob's hip was out of joint while he was fighting with him. 27 And he said: “Let me go away, for dawn is coming!” But he said: “I will not let you go away unless you bless me!”  28 And he said to him: “What is your name?” And he said: “Jacob.” 29 And he said: “Your name will no more be Jacob, but Israel, for you have striven with God and with men, and you have received the victory.” 30 And Jacob asked him: “Tell me, please, your name.” But he said: “How is it that you are asking about my name?” And he blessed him there.
	And Jacob gave that place the name Peniel (God's Face), “for I have seen God face to face, and yet I am still alive.” 32 And the sun arose upon him when he passed by Peniel, but by reason of his hip he did not walk with equal steps. 33 Therefore the sons of Israel until this day do no eat the sinew of the thigh which is at the hollow of the hip, since he touched Jacob's hollow of the hip, indeed the sinew of the thigh. 
	
RANTA 33 
Ar Yácov ortane henyat ar yente, ar yé, Ésau túlane, ar óse neri tuxar canta. Ar hyarnes i hini Lean ar Ráħelen ar i inya mól attan. 2 Ar panyanes i móli ar hinattar opo i exi, ar Lea ar hínaryar ca te, ar Ráħel ar Yósef ve i tellar. 3 Tá isse lahtane opo téna, ar cumbes i talamenna lúr otso, tenna túles hare hánoryanna.
	4 Ar Ésau norne velien se, ar panyanes rancuryat *os se, ar minqueses, ar niettar uller. 5 Ar ortanes henyat ar cenne i nissi ar i hini, ar quentes: “Man nar sine asetye?” Ar hé hanquente: “I híni i Eru lisseryasse ánie núrotyan.”

CHAPTER 33
And Jacob raised his eyes and looked, and behold, Esau was coming, and with him four hundred men. And he split the children on  Leah and Rachel and on the two female thralls. 2 And he put the thralls and their children in front of the others, and Leah and her children behind them, and Rachel and Joseph as the hindmost ones. 3 Then he passed in front of them, and he bent to the ground seven times, until he came hear to his brother.
	4 And Esau ran to meet him, and he put his arms around him, and he kissed him, and their tears flowed. 5 And he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children, and he said: “Who are these with you?” And he answered: “The children that God in his grace has given your servant.”

	6 Tá i móli túler hare, tú ar hínattar, ar cumbette. 7  Ar yú Lea ar hínaryar túler hare ar cumber, ar epeta Yósef ar Ráħel túler hare, ar cumbette. 8 Ar eques: “Mana télatye i quanda *estoliénen ya velden?” Ar hé eque: “Hire lisse mi herunyo hendu.” 9 Mal eque Ésau: “Samin fáre, hánonya. Hepa ya vératya ná.” 10 Ono eque Yácov: “Vá! Mecin, qui sí ihírien lisse hendutyatse, tá cama i anna mányallo. An etta ecénien cendeletya, ve mo cene Eruo cendele, ar anetye fastana pa ni. 11 Á mapa, mecin, annanya ya anaie talana tyenna, pan Eru ánie nin lisse, ar pan samin ilqua.” Ar hortanéses, ar Ésau nampe sa.  

	6 Then the thralls came near, they  and their children, and they bowed. 7 And also Leah and her children came near and bowed, and thereafter Joseph and Rachel came near, and they bowed. 8 And he said: “What are you intending with the whole camp that I met?” And he said: “To find grace in my lord's eyes.” 9 But Esau said: “I have enough, my brother. Keep what is your own.” 10 But Jacob said: “No! Please, if now I have found grace in your eyes, then receive the gift from my hand. For therefore I have seen your face, as one sees God's face, and you were pleased about me. 11 Take, please, my gift that I have brought to you, since God has given me grace, and since I have everything.” And he urged him, and Esau took it.

	12 Ar eques: “Angwe lelya lendangwasse, ar menuvan epe tye.” 13 Mal hé quente senna: “Herunya ista in i híni nar milye, ar mauya nin sana pa i i lamári ar i yaxi i antar ilin. Qui mo ele te acca lintave rie erya aure, ilye i lamári qualuvar. 14 Nai herunya, mecin, autuva nó núrorya, ar inye lelyuva lencave, i lintiesse i celvaron i nar epe ni ar i lintiesse yanen i híni vantar, tenna tuluvan herunyanna mi Sëir.” 15 Ar Ésau quente: “Lava nin hehta asetye nelli i quenion i nar asinye.” Mal hé quente: “Mana i maure? Nai híran lisse mi herunyo hendu!”
	16 Ar Ésau yana auresse nanwenne tieryasse Sëirenna. 17 Ar Yácov lende Succotenna ar carastane insen coa, ar celvaryain carnes caumali. Etta sana nóme ná estaina Succot (Caumar).
	18 Ar Yácov túle rainesse i ostonna estaina Hyecem, ya caita Canáan·nóresse, íre túles Pandam-Aramello, ar sámes *estolierya opo i osto. 19 Ar yasse panyanelyes *lancoarya mancanes insen ranta talanwa ho yondoryar Ħamor, Hyecemo atar, cesitar tuxan. 20 Ar ortanes tasse *yangwa ar estane sa El-Elohe-Israel (Eru i Aino Israélo).

	 12 And he said: “Let us go on our journey, and I will go before you.” 13 But he  said to him: “My lord knows that the children are weak, and it is necessary for me to think about the flocks and the cows that give milk. If one drives them too fast only a single day, all the flocks will die. 14 May my lord, please, pass before his servant, and I will travel slowly, at the speed of the animals that are before me and at the speed with which the children walk, until I shall come to my lord in Seir.” 15 And Esau said: “Let me leave with you some men  of the people that are with me.” But he said: “What is the need? May I be finding grace in the eyes of my lord.”
	16 And Esau on that day returned on his way to Seir. 17 And Jacob came to Succoth and built for himself a house, and for his animals he built shelters. Therefore that place is named Succoth (Shelters).
	18 And Jacob came in peace to the city called Shechem, which lies in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan-Aram, and he had his camp in front of the city. 19 And where he had put his tent he traded to himself a piece of ground from the sons of Hamor, Shechem's father, for a hundred qesita. 20 And he erected there an alter and called it El-Elohe-Israel (God  Israel's God).

RANTA 34 
Ar Lína, Leo selye ye coldes Yácoven, etelende velien i nóreo vendi. 2 Mal Hyecem, yondorya  Ħamor i Ħivya, i nóreo condo, cenne se ar nampe se, ar hé caine óse ar mapante se.
	3 Mal fearya himyane Lína, Yácovo selye, ar méles i vende, ar quentes tiutala quettar i vendenna. 4 Ar Hyecem carampe Ħamor ataryanna, quétala: “Ánin anta vende sina ve verinya.”
	5 Sí Yácov hlasse i hé carnelyane Lína selyerya úpoica, mal yondoryar enger as celvaryar i restasse, ar Yácov quente munta tenna túlelte. 6 Ar Ħamor, Hyecemo atar, etelende Yácovenna quetien óse.
	7 Ar Yácovo yondor túler i restallo íre hlasselte sa, ar i neri sámer naire ar túra rúşe, pan carnelyanes alasaila nat Israelde caitiénen as Yácovo selye, ve mo ua lertane care.


CHAPTER 34
And Dinah, Leah's daugher that she bore to Jacob, went out to see the maidens of the land. 2 But Shechem, the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her and took her, and he lay with her and ravished her.
	3 But his soul cleaved to Dinah, Jacob's daughter, and he loved the maiden, and he spoke comforting words to the maiden. 4 And Shechem spoke to Hamor his father, saying: “Give me this maiden as my wife.”
	5 Now Jacob heard that he had made Dinah his daughter unclean, but his sons were with his animals in the field, and Jacob said nothing until they came. 6 And Hamor, Shechem's father, went out to Jacob to speak with him.
	7 And Jacob's sons came from the field when they heard it, and the men had grief and great anger, since he had done an unwise thing in Israel by lying with Jacob's daughter, as one might not do.

	8 Ar Ħamor carampe téna, quétala: “Hyecem yondonyo fea milya selyelda. Mecin, ásen verta hé. 9 Ar nuta inde menna veryangwínen; ámen anta selyeldar, ar á mapa selyelmar len. 10 Ar maruvalde aselme, ar i nóre euva epe le; á mare ar manca sasse, ar ñeta len armar tasse.”
	11 Ar Hyecem quente Líno atarenna ar hánoryannar: “Nai hiruvan lisse mi henduldat, ar ya quetilde ninna antauvan. 12 Cana nillo ita túra indisso *paityale ar anna, ar antauvan ve quetilde ninna, mal ánin verta i vende!”

	8 And Hamor spoke to them, saying: “Shechem my son's soul longs for your daughter. Please, give her to him in marriage. 9 And bind yourselves to us by marriages, give us your daughters, and take our daughters to you. 10 And you will dwell with us, and the land will be before you; dwell and trade in it, and get yourselves possessions there.”
	11 And Shechem said to Dinah's father and to her brothers: “May I find grace in your eyes, and what you will say to me I will give. 21 Demand from me a very great bride's price and gift, and I shall give as you say to me, but give me the maiden in marriage!”

	13 Mal Yácovo yondor hanquenter Hyecem ar Ħamor atarya finiénen. Ar carampelte, pan carnelyanes Lína néşalta úpoica, 14 ar quenter téna: “Ualme lerta care nat sina, anta nésalma neren ye ua *oscirna, an ta ná men nucumnie. 15 Rie sinen şáquetuvalme len: qui oluvalde ve mé, *osciriénen ilya hanu mici le. 16 Tá antauvalme selyelmar len, ar mapuvalme selyeldar men, ar maruvalme aselde, ar oluvalve er lie. 17 Mal qui ualde lastuvar menna, náven *oscirne, tá mapuvalme selyelma ar autuvar.”

	13 But Jacob's sons answered Shechem and Hamor his father with cunning. And they spoke, since he had made Dinah their sister unclean, 14 and said to them: “We may not do this thing, give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for that is to us a shame . 15 Only in this way will we assent to you: if you will become like us, by circumcizing every male among you. 16 Then we shall give our daughters to you, and we shall take your daughters to us, and we  shall dwell with you, and we  shall become one people. 17 But if you will not listen to us, to be circumcized, then we shall take our daughter and go off.”

	18 Ar quettaltar fastaner Ħamor ar Hyecem yondorya. 19 Ar i nessa nér úne telwa pa carie i nat, an sámes alasse mi Yácovo selye. Ar anes i amminda mí quanda nosse ataryo.
	20 Ar Ħamor ar Hyecem yondorya túler ostotto andonna, ar quentette as ostotto neri, quétala: 21 “Neri sine nar nilde ven. Etta lava tien mare i nóresse ar manca sasse. An yé, i nóre ná faryala landa tien. Alve mapa selyeltar ven ve verilvar, ar alve anta tien selyelvar. 22 Rie sinen i neri şáquetuvar ven marien aselve, olien er lie: qui ilya hanu mici vi nauva *oscirna, ve té nar *oscirne. 23 Yaxeltar ar armaltar ar ilye celvaltar, ma ualte oluva véralvar? Rie alve şáquete ten, ar maruvalte aselve.” 24 Ar lastanelte  Ħamorenna ar Hyecem yondoryanna, illi i etelender ter ostoryo ando, ar ilya hanu náne *oscirna, illi i etelender ter ostoryo ando.

	18 And their words pleased Hamor and Shechem his son. 19 And the young man was not late about doing the thing, for he had joy in Jacob's daughter. And he was the most prominent in the whole kin of his father.
	20 And Hamor and Shechem his son tcame to the gate of their city, and they spoke with the men of their city, saying: 21 “These men are friendly to us. Therefore let them dwell in the land and trade in it. For behold, the land is sufficiently wide for them. Let us take their daughters to us as our wives, and let us give them our daughters. 22 Only in this way will the men assent to us to dwell with us, to become one people: if every male among us will be circumsised, as they are circumsised. 23 Their cows and their goods and all their animals, will they not become our own? Just let us assent to them, and they will dwell with us.” 24 And they listened to Hamor and to Shechem his son, all that went out throught his city's gate, and every male was circumsised, all that went out through his city's gate.

	25 Ar túle i neldea auresse, lan anelte naicesse, in atta mici Yácovo yondor – Símeon ar Lévi, Líno hánor – nampet ilya nér macilya, ar túlette pen hampie i ostonna, ar nacantette ilya hanu. 26 Ar nacantette Ħamor ar Hyecem yondorya i macilo maicanen, ar nampette Lína et Hyecemo coallo ar oantet. 27 Yácovo yondor túler i nancannar ar nampe rauna i ostollo, pan carnelyanelte néşatta úpoica. 28 Nampette mámaltar ar yaxiltar ar *pellopoltar ar ya enge i ostosse ar ya enge i restasse, 29 ar ilya almalta. Ente, ilye pityaltar ar veriltar nampette mir mando ar nampe rauna telo, ilqua ya enge i coassen.
	30 Ar Yácov quente Símeon ar Lévinna: “Atyáriette urdie nin, cariénen ni nattirna imíca i marir i nóresse, imíca i Canáanyar ar i Perisyar. Inye nótima ná nótesse, ar ocomuvalte ar petuvar ni, ar nauvan nancarna, inye ar nossenya.” 31 Mal quentette: “Ma nauvanes lávina lenga néşamman ve *imbacinden?”

	25 And  came  on the third day, while they were in pain, that two among Jacob's sons – Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brother – took each man his sword, and they came without hindrance to the city, and they slew every male. 26 And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son by the blade of the sword, and they took Dinah out of Shechem's house and went off. 27 Jacob's sons came upon the slain ones and took booty from the city, since they  had made their  sister unclean. 28 They  took their  sheep and their cows and their asses and what was in the city and what was in the field, 29 and all their wealth. Furthermore, all their little ones and their wives they took into custody and took boody from them, everything that was in the houses.
	30 And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi: “You have caused difficulty for me, by making me despised among  who dwell in the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. I am few in number, and they will gather and will strike me, and I shall be destroyed, I and my family.” 31 But they said: “Was he going to be allowed to behave towards our sister as to a whore?”

RANTA 35  
Ar Eru quente Yácovenna: “Á orta, mena ama Vet-Élenna ar mara tasse, ar cara tasse *yangwe Erun, ye tannexe lyen íre úşanel Ésau hánolyo cendelello.”
	2 Tá Yácov quente nosseryanna ar illi i enger óse: “Á panya oa i ettelie ainor yar ear mici le, ar á poita inde, ar á vista larmaldar. 3 Tá alve orta ar lelya ama Vet-Élenna, ar caruvan tasse *yangwe i Ainon ye hanquente ni mí ré şangienyava, ar enge óni i tiesse yasse lenden.”
	4 Ar antanelte Yácoven ilye i ettelie ainor yar sámelte aselte, ar i cormar yar enger mi hlarultat, ar Yácov nurtane tai nu i norno ya enge ara Hyecem.
	5 Ar lendelte, ar caure Erullo lantane i ostonnar pelila te, ar ualte roitaner Yácovo yondor.
	6 Sie Yácov túle Lúsenna, ya ea Canáan·nóresse, isse ar ilye i queni i enger óse. 
	7 Ar carastanes tasse *yangwa, ar estanes i nóme Él-Vet-Él (Aino Vet-Élo), an tasse Eru náne apantana sen, íre úşanes hánoryo cendelello.
	8 Ar Levora, Revecco *tyetinde, qualle; ar antanelte sen sapsa nu Vet-Él, nu i norno. Sie ñentes i esse Allon-Vacut (Norno Yaimeva).

CHAPTER 35
And God said to Jacob: “Rise, go up to Bethel and dwell there, and make there an altar to God, who showed himelf to you when you were fleeing from the face of Esau your brother.”
	2 Then Jacob said to his kin and all that were with him: “Put away the foreign Gods that are among you, and cleanse yourselves, and change your garments. 3 Then let us rise and go up to Bethel, and I will make there an altar to the God that that answered me in the day of my tribulation, and was with me on the way that I went.”
	4 And they gave to Jacob all the foreign gods that they had with them, and the rings that were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the oak that was by Shechem.
	5 And they went, an fear from God fell upon the cities surrounding them, and they did not purse Jacob's sons.
	6 Thus Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, he and all the people that were with him.
	7 And he built there an altar, and he called the place El-Bethel (God of Bethel), for there God was revealed to him, while he was fleeing from his brother's face.
	8 And Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died; and they gave her a grave underneath Bethel, under the oak. Thus it got the name Allon-Bakuth (Oak of Wailing).

	9 Ar Eru tannexe Yácoven ata, íre hé túle Pandam-aramello, ar aistanes hé. 10 Ar Eru quente henna: “Esselya Yácov ná. Mal ual ambe samuva i esse Yávov, ono Israel nauva esselya.” Sie antanes hén i esse Israel.
	11 Ar Eru quente henna: “Inye Eru Iluvala. Yava ar ola rimba! Lie, é combe lielíva ortuvar lyello, ar aralli ettuluvar oşwelyallo. 12 Ar i nóre ya antanen Avrahámen ar Ísacen, elyen antauvan sa. Ar erdelyan apa lye antauvan nóre sina.” 13 Ar Eru lende ama sello i nómello yasse carampes óse.
	14 Ar Yácov ortane tarma i nómesse yasse hé carampelyane óse, tarma ondova, ar ulyanes *suctoyanca sanna, ar ulyanes millo sanna. 15 Ar Yácov antane i nómen yasse Eru quente óse i esse Vet-Él (Coa Eruva).
	16 Ar lendelte ho Vet-Él, ar lan en sámelte tie menien nó tulumnelte Efratenna, Ráħel cólane hína, mal i colie urda né. 17 Ar urda colieryasse i *ammestáme quente senna: “Áva ruce, an yú sí yondo nauva napánina lyen!” 18 Ar túle, íre effíranes – an qualles – in estanes yondorya Venóni, mal atarya estane hé Venyamin.
	19 Sie Ráħel qualle ar ñente sapsarya i tiesse Efratenna, ta ná, Vet-Lehem. 20 Ar Yácov panyane tarma sapsaryasse, i imya Tarma Sapso Ráħelo ya tare tasse tenna ré sina. 
	21 Ar Israel lende, ar ortanes *lancoarya han Mihtal-Érer. 22 Ar túle, lan Israel márane sana nóresse, i Rëuven menne ar caine as Vilha, ataryo *ovesse. Ar Israel hlasse pa sa.
	Sí Yácovo yondor náner yunque. 23 Leo yondor náner Rëuven – Yácovo minnóna – ar Simeon ar Lévi ar Yehúra ar Issacar ar Sevulun. 24 Raħelo yondor náner Yósef ar Venyamin, 25 ar Vilha Ráħelo mólo yondor náner Lán ar Naftali. 26 Ar Silpa Leo mólo yondor náner Ár ar Ahyer. Sine náner Yácovo yondor, i náner nóne sen Pandan-aramesse.
	27 Ar Yácov túle Ísac ataryanna Mamresse, mi Ciryat-Arva – ta ná Ħevron, yasse Avraham ar Ísac marner ve aianor. 28 Ar Ísaco rí náner loar *toloquean ar tuxa. 29 Tá Ísac effirne ar qualle ar náne comyana lieryanna, yára ar quanta ríon, ar Ésau ar Yácov yondoryar se-taller sapsaryanna.

	19 Thus Rachel died and got her grave on the way to Ephrath, that is, Bethlehem. 20 And Jacob put a pillar on her grave, the same Pillar of Rachel's Grave that stands there until this day.
	21 And Israel went, and he put up his tent beyond Migdal-Eder. 22 And it came , while Israel was dwelling in that place, that Reuben went and lay with Bilha, his father's concubine. And Israel heard about it.
	Now Jacob's sons were twelve. 23 Leah's sons were Reuben – Jacob's firstborn – and Simeon and Levi and Judah and Issachar an Zebulun. 24 Rachel's sons were Joseph and Benjamin, 25 and Bilha Rachel's thrall's sons were Dan and Naphtali. 26 And Zilpa Leah's thrall's sons were Gad and Asher. These were Jacob's sons, that were born to him in Paddam-aram.
	27 And Jacob came to Isaac his father in Mamre, in Kiriath-Arba – that is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac dwelt as strangers. 28 And Isaac's days were a hundred and eighty years. 29 Then Isaac expired and died was gathered to his people, old and full of days, and Esau and Jacob his sons brought him to his grave.

RANTA 36 
Ar sine nar indyoryar Ésau – ta ná, Erom.
	2 Ésau nampe veriryar i nission Canáano: Ára selyerya Élon i Ħetya, ar Oholiváma yeo amil náne Ána, selyerya Síveon i Ħíva, 3 ar Vasemat selyerya Ismael, néşarya Nevaiot. 4 Ar Ára colde Ésauen Elífas, ar Vásemat colde Rëuel, 5 ar Oholiváma colde Yëus ar Yalam ar Coraħ. 6
Ar Ésau nampe veriryar ar yondoryar ar selyeryar ar ilye i queni coaryo, ar yaxeryar ar ilye celvaryar, ar ilye armaryar yar comyanelyanes Canáan·nóresse, ar oantes mir nóre oa Yácov hánoryallo.

CHAPTER 36
And these are the descendants of Esau – that is, Edom.
	2 Esau took his wifes of the women of Canaan: Adah daugher of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah whose mother was Anah, daughter of Zibeon the Hivite, 3 and Basemath daughter of Ishmael, sister of Nebaioth. 4 And Adah bore to Esau Elifas, ar Basemath bore Reuel, 5 and Oholibamah bore Jeush and Jalem and Korah. 6 And Esau took his wives and his sons and his daughters and all the people of his house, and his cows and all his animals, and all his goods that he had gathered in the land of Canaan, and he went off into a land away from Jacob his brother.

	7 An ya haryanette náne acca olya mariettan uo, ar lá ence i nóren yasse marnette ve aianor colitat, castanen celvattaron. 8 Etta Ésau marne ambuna nóriesse mi Sëir. Ésau ná Erom.
	9 Ar sine nar indyoryar Ésau, atar i Eromyaron i ambuna nóriéno mi Sëir. 10 Sine nar Ésauo: yondoron essi: Elifas yondorya Ára, Ésauo veri; Rëuel yondorya Vasemat, Ésauo veri. 11 Ar yondoryar Elifas náner Téman, Ómer, Sefo ar Átam, yú Cenas. 12 Ar Timna náne *ovesse Elifassen yondorya Ésau, ar coldes Elifassen Amalec. Sine náner yondoryar Ára, Ésauo veri.

	7 And what they  possessed was too much for them to dwell together, and it was not possible for the land in which they dwelt as strangers to bear them, by reason of their animals. 8 Therefore Esau dwelt in the hilly country in Seir. Esau is Edom.
	9 And these are the descendants of Esau, father of the Edomites of the hilly country in Seir. 10 These are the names of the sons of Esau: Eliphaz son of Adah, Esau's wife; Reuel son of Basemath, Esau's wife. 11 And the sons of Elifas were Teman, Omer, Zepho and Gatham, also Kenaz. 12 And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz the son of Esau, and she bore to Eliphaz Amalek. These were the sons of Adah, Esau's wife.

	13 Ar sine nar yondoryar Rëuel: Naħat ar Seraħ, Hyamma ar Missa. Té naner yondoryar Vásemat, Ésauo veri. 14 Ar sine nar yondoryar Oholiváma selyerya Ána, selyerya Siveon, Ésauo veri: Coldes Ésauen  Yëus ar Yalam ar Coraħ. 15 Sine nar i turcor yondoron Ésauo: Yondoryar Elifas, Ésauo minnóna: Téman i turco, Ómer i turco, Sefo i turco, Cenas i turco, 16 Coraħ i turco, Atam i turco, Amalec i turco. Sine nar i turcor i túler ho Elifas Erom·nóresse. Sine nar yondoryar Ára.
	17 Ar sine nar yondoryar Rëuel, Ésauo yondo: Naħat i turco, Seraħ i turco, Hyamma i turco, Missa i turco. Sine nar i turcor i túler et Rëuel Erom·nóresse. Sine nar yondoryar Vámemat, Ésauo turco.
	18 Ar sine nar yondoryar Oholiváma, Ésauo veri: Yëus i turco, Yalam i turco, Coraħ i turco. Sine nar i turcor nóne lo Oholiváma selyerya Ána, Ésauo veri. 19 Sine nar yondoryar Ésau, ar sine nar i turcor mici te. Náse Erom. 

	13 And these are the sons of Reuel: Nahath and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah. They were the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife. 14 And these are the sons of Oholibamah daughter of Anah, daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: She bore to Esau Jeush and Jalam and Korah. 15 These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau: The sons of Eliphaz, Esau's firstborn: Teman the chief, Omer the chief, Zepho the chief, 16 Korah the chief, Gatham the chief, Amalek the chief. These are the chiefs that came from Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Adah.
	17 And these are the sons of Reuel, Esau's son: Nahath the chief, Zerah the chief, Shammah the chief, Mizzah the chief. These are the chiefs borne by Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife. 19 These are the sons of Esau, and these are the chiefs among them. He is Edom.

	20 Sine nar yondoryar Sëir i Ħorya, i marner i nóresse: Lótan ar Hyóval ar Siveon ar Ána 21 ar Líhyon ar Éser ar Líhyan. Sine nar i turcor i Ħoryaron, Sëiro yondor Erom·nóresse. 22 Ar yondoryar Lótan náner Ħori ar Héman, ar Lótano néşa náne Timna. 23 Ar sine nar yondoryar Hyóval: Alwan ar Manaħat ar Éval, Hyefo ar Ónam.

20 These are the sons of Seir i Horite, who dwelt in the land: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah 22 and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan. These are the chiefs of the Horites, Seir's sons in the land of Edom. 23 And these are the sons of Shobal: Alvan and Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.

	24 Ar sine nar yondoryar Siveon: Aia ar Ana. Hé náne i Ana ye hirne i lauce ehteler i ravandasse, lan anes mavar i *perroccoin Siveon ataryava.
	25 Ar sine nar hínaryar Ana: Lihyon ar Oholiváma, Ano selye.
	26 Ar sine nar yondoryar Lihyon: Hemran ar Esvan ar Itran ar Ceran. 
	27 Sine nar yondoryar Éser: Vilhan ar Saavan ar Acan.
	28 Sine nar yondoryar Lihyan: Ús ar Aran.
	29 Sine nar Ħoryaron turcor: Lótan i turco, Hyóval i turco, Siveon i turco, Ana i turco, 30 Lihyon i turco, Éser i turco,  Lihyan i turco. Sine nar i Ħoryaron turcor, turcoltainen Sëir·nóresse.

	24 And these are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. He was the Anah that found the hot springs in the wilderness, while he was sheperd to the asses of Sibeon his father.
	25 And these are the children of Anah: Dishon and Oholibamah, Anah's daughter. 
	26 And these are the sons of Dishon: Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.
	27 These are the sons of Ezer: Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan.
	28 These are the sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
	29 These are the chiefs of the Horites: Lotan the chief, Shobal the chief, Zibeon the chief, Anah the chief, 30 Dishon the chief, Ezer the chief, Dishan the chief. These are the chiefs of the Horites, by their chiefs in the land of Seir.
	
	31 Ar sine nar i arani i turner Erom·nóresse, nó enge aran turila Israelindi: 32 Vela yondorya Veor turne Eromesse, ar ostoryo esse náne Linháva. 33 Íre Vela qualle, Yóvav yondorya Seraħ Vosrallo olle aran menyasse. 34 Íre Yóvav qualle, Huhyam nórello i Temanyaron olle aran menyasse. 35 Ire Huhyam qualle, Haral yondorya Veral – ye turune Miryan restasse Moavo – olle aran menyasse, ar ostoryo esse náne Avit.

	31 And these are the kings that ruled in the land of Edom, before  was  king ruling the children of Israel: 32 Bela the son of Beor ruled in Edom, and the name of his city was Dinhabah. 33 When Bela died, Jobab the son of Zerah from Bozrah became king in his stead . 34 When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites became king in his stead. 35 When Husham died, Hadad the son of Bedad – who conquered Midian in the field of Moab – became king in his stead, and the name of his city was Avith.

	36 Íre Haral qualle, Samla Masrecallo olle aran menyasse. 37 Íre Samla qualle, Hyául Reħovotello ara i Sire olle aran menyasse. 38 Íre Hyául qualle, Vaal-Ħánan yondorya Acvor olle aran menyasse. 39 Íre Vaal-Ħánan yondorya Acvor qualle, Haral olle aran menyasse, ar ostoryo esse name Páu. Ente, veriryo esse náne Mehétavel, selyerya Matrel, selyerya Mesáhav. 40 Ar sine nar i essi i turcoron i sámer ontalelta ho Ésau, nosseltainen, vehteltainen, esseltainen: Timna i turco, Alwa i turco, Yetet i turco, 41 Oholiváma i turco, Éla i turco, Pínon i turco, 42 Cenas i turco, Téman i turco, Mivsar i turco, 43 Mahtiel i turco, Íram i turco. Sine nar Eromo turcor, i nóminen yassen marnelte i nóresse ya haryanelte. Si Ésau ná, Eromyaron atar.

	36 When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah became king in his stead. 37 When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth by the River became king in his stead. 38 When Shaul died, Baal-Hanan son of Akhbor olle aran in his stead. 39 When Baal-Hanan the son of Akhbor died, Hadad became king in his stead, and the name of his city was Pau, Furthermore, the name of his wife was Mehetabel, daughter of Matred, daughter of Mezahab. 40 And these are the names of the chiefs that had their descent from Esau, by their families, by their haunts, by their names: Timna the chief, Alvah the chief, Jetheth the chief, 41 Oholibamah the chief, Elah the chief, Pinon the chief, 42 Kenaz the chief, Teman the chief, Mibzar the chief, 43 Magdiel the chief, Iram the chief. These are the chiefs of Edom, by the places where they dwelt in the land that they possessed. This is Esau, father of the Edomites.

RANTA 37 
Ar Yácov márane i nóresse yasse atarya marne ve aiano, Canáan·nóresse.
	2 Si ná i nyarna pa Yácovo indyor.
	Íre Yósef sáme loar otoque, anes mavar i mámain as hánoryar, ar pan anes rie seldo, anes as yondoryar Vilha ar yondoryar Silpa, veriryar atarya. Ar Yósef nyarne ataryan pa i ulqui yar hlasses i carnelte. 3 Ar Israel méle Yósef epe ilye hyane yondoryar, an hé náne yárieryo yondo, ar carnes hén colla rimbe quilelion. 4 Íre hánoryar cenner in atarelta méle hé epe ilye hánoryar, hé tévelte, ar lá ence tien quete henna rainesse.

CHAPTER 37
And Jacob was dwelling in the land where his father dwelt as a stranger, in the land of Canaan.
	2 This is the tale of Jacob's descendants.
	When Joseph had  seventeen years, he was shepherd for the sheep with his brothers, and since he was only a boy, he was with the sons of Bilha and the sons of Zilpa, the wives of his father. And Joseph told his father about the evil things that he heard that they did. 3 And Joseph loved Joseph more than all this other sons, for he was the son of his old age, and he made for him a cloak of numerous colours. 4 When his brothers saw that their father loved him more than his brothers, they hated him, and it was not possible for them to speak to him in a peaceful manner .

	5 Tá ólane Yósefen, ar nyarnes hánoryar pa i olos, ar ñentelte an casta tevien se. 6 Sie quentes téna: “Mecin, hlara olos sina ya utúlie ninna! 7 Ar yé, elve nútaner limnali i restasse, ar yé, ninya limna oronte ar tárane. Ar yé, limnaldar túler ar pelder sa, ar cumbelte epe limnanya.”
	8 Ar hánoryar quenter senna: “Ma é turuvatye me? Hya ma é nauvatye herulva?” Ar téveltes an ambe, oloryainen ar quettaryainen.
	9 Ar ólane sen ata, ar nyarnes hánoryain pa sa ar quente: “Yé, utúlie ninna an olos. Ar yé, Anar Işilye ar tinwi minque cumber epe ni.” 10 Ar nyarneses ataryan ar hánoryain, mal atarya naicine se ar quente senna: “Mana olos sina ya utúlie tyenna? Ma é tuluvar inye ar amilletya ar hánotyar cuvien cemenna epe tyé?” 11 Ar hánoryar *hrucenner se, mal atarya hempe i quetie sámaryasse. 

	5 Then Joseph dreamed , and he told his brothers about the dream, and they got yet another reason for hating him. 6 Thus he said to them, “Please, hear this dream that has come to me! 7 And behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and behold, my sheaf arose and was standing. And behold, your sheaves came and surrounded it, and they bowed before my sheaf.”
	8 And his brothers said to him: “Are you indeed to rule us? Or are you indeed to be our lord?” And they hated him still more, by his dreams and by his words.
	9 And he dreamed again, and he told his brothers about it and said: “Behold,  has come to me another dream. And behold, the Sun and the Moon and eleven stars bowed before me.” 10 And he told it to his father and to his brothers, but his father rebuked him and said to him: “What is this dream that has come to you? Will I and your mother and your brothers indeed come to bow to earth before you?” 11 And his brothers envied him, but his father kept the saying in his mind.

	12 Ar hánoryar lender tirien i lamáre atareltava mi Hyecem. 13 Ar Israel quente Yósefenna: “Ma hánotyar uar tírar i lamáre Hyecemesse? Tula, ar mentauvan tye téna.” Ar hé quente senna: “Sisse nanye!” 14 Ar quentes henna: “Mecin, mena, cenien qui hánotyar hárar máriesse ar i lamáre hára máriesse, ar ánin tala nan quetta.” Sie mentanes hé i Ħevron·nandello, ar hé túle Hyecemenna.
	15 Ar nér hirne se, ar yé, vanteánes i restasse. Ar i nér maquente senna, quétala: “Mana cestal?” 16 Ar quentes: “Cestean hánonyar. Mecin, nyara nin masse té tírar i lamáre!” 17 Ar i nér quente: “Oantielte silo, an hlassenyet quéta: Alve mene Lotanenna.” Tá Yósef lende apa hánoryar, ar hirneset mi Lotan.

	12 And his brothers went to watch the flocks of their father in Shechem. 13 And Israel said to Joseph: “Are your brothers not watching the flock at Shechem? Come, and I will send you to them.” And he said to him: “Here I am!” 14 And he said to him: “Please, go, to see if your brothers are doing well  and the flock is doing well , and bring back to me word.” Thus he send him from the Hebron valley, and he came to Shechem. 
	15 And a man found him, and behold, he was walking in the field. And the man asked him, saying: “What do you seek?” 16 And he said: “I am seeking my brothers. Please, tell me where they are watching over the flock!” 17 And the man said: “They have gone away from here, for I heard them say: Let us go to Dothan.” Then Joseph went after his brothers, and he found them in Dothan.

	18 Mal cenneltes hairallo, ar nó túles hare téna, carnelte pano uo nahtien se. 19 Ar quentelte, quén i exenna: “Ela, sina hér olorion túla! 20 Ar sí, alve nahta se ar hate se mir er i tamporon! Tá cenuvalve mana oluva oloryaron!” 21 Mal íre Rëuven hlasse sa, etelehteses et málta, ar quentes: “Ávalve mapa coivierya!” 22 Ente, Rëuven quente téna: “Áva et-ulya serce! Hata se mir tampo sina ya ea i ravandasse, mal áva panya má sesse.” Teldes etelehta se et málta, mentaven se nan ataryanna.
	23 Ar túle, íre Yósef túlelyane hánoryannar, i tuncelte Yósefello collarya, i colla rimbe quilelion ya cólanes. 24 Tá nampeltes ar hante se mir i tampo. Mal i tampo lusta né; lá enge nén sasse.

	18 But they saw him from afar, and before he came near to them, they made a plan together to slay him. 19 And they said, one to the other: “Look, this master of dreams is coming! 20 And now, let us kill him and throw him into one of the wells. Then we shall see what will become of his dreams!” 21 But when Reuben heard it, he delivered him out of their hand, and he said: “Let us not take his life!” 22 Furthermore, Reuben said to them: “Do not pour forth blood! Throw him into this well that is in the wilderness, but do not lay hand on him.” He intended to deliver him out of their hand, to send him back to his father.
	23 And it came , when Joseph had come to his brothers, that they pulled off Joseph his cloak, the cloak of numerous colours that he was carrying. 24 Then they took him and threw him into the well. But the well was empty;  was not  water in it.

	25 Ar hamunelte matien massa. Tá ortanelte hendultat ar yenter, ar yé, téma Ismaelyaron túlane Ilearello, ar ulumpeltar cólaner vihte, oine ar suhte, talien tai undu mir Mirrandor.
	26 Ar Yehúra quente hánoryannar: “Mana ñetilve nahtiénen hánolva ar nurtiénen sercerya? 27 Tula, alve vace se i Ismaelyain, ar ávalve panya málva sesse, an náse hánolva, hrávelva.” Ar hánoryar lastaner senna. 38 Ar Miryanyali lahtaner, neri mancaléva, ar tuncelte ar ortaner Yósef et i tampollo ar vancer Yósef i Ismaelyain telpemittain *yúquean. Ar tallelte Yósef Mirrandorenna.

	25 And they sat down to eat bread. Then they raised their eyes and looked, and behold, a caravan  of Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead, and their camels were carrying gum, balm  and resin to bring them down into Egypt.
	26 And Judah said to his brothers: “What do we get by killing our brother and by covering  his blood? 27 Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let us not put our hand on him, for he is our brother, our flesh.” And his brothers listened to him. 38 And some Midianites passed by, men of commerce, and they pulled and raised Joseph out of the well and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. And they brought Joseph to Egypt.

	29 Ar Rëuven nanwenne i tamponna, ar yé, Yósef lá enge i tamposse, ar narcanes larmaryar. 30 Ar nanwennes hánoryannar ar quente: “I seldo vanwa ná! Ar inye, manna inye menuva?”
	31 Ar nampelte Yósefo colla ar nacanter yat, ar sumbanelte i colla mir i serce. 32 Tá mentanelte i colla rimbe quilelion ar taller sa atareltanna, ar quentelte: “Si utúvielme. Cena qui nás yondotyo colla hya lá.” 33 Ar sintenes, ar quentes: “Nás yondonyo colla. Ulca hravan amátie se! Yósef é anaine narcana mir rantar!” 34 Ar narcanes larmaryar ar panyane lanne findiva oşweryasse, ar nainanes yondorya ter rimbe réli. 35 Ar ilye yondoryar ar ilye selyeryar oronter tiutaven se, mal váquentes tiutale, ar quentes: “An untuvan mir i sapsa yondoyanna nairesse!” Ar atarya náne yaimea sen.
	36 Mal i Miryanyar taller se mir Mirrandor ar vancer se Pofifáren, Fáro arandur, hér i cundoron.

	29 And Reuben returned to the well, and behold, Joseph was not in the well, and he tore his garments. 30 And he returned to his brothers and said: “The boy is gone! And I, where to am I to go?”
	31 And they took Jospeh's cloak and killed a goat, and they dipped the cloak in the blood. 32 Then they sent the cloak of many colors and brought it to their father, and they said: “This we have found. See if it is your son's cloak or not.” 33 And he knew it, and he said: “It is my son's cloak. An evil beast has eaten him! Joseph has indeed been torn into pieces!” 34 And he tore his garments and put cloth of fair on his loins, and he lamented his son for many days. 35 And all his sons and all his daughters arose to comfort him, but he refused comfort, and he said: “For I shall go down into the grave to my son in sorrow!” And his father was wailing for him.
	36 But the Midianites brought him into Egypt and sold him to Potiphar, Pharaoh's royal servant, master of the guards.

RANTA 38 
Ar túle enta lúmesse i Yehúra ununte hánoryallon, ar lemnes as Arullamya nér yeo esse náne Ħíra. 2 Ar Yehúra cenne tasse i selye Canáanya nero yeo esse náne Hyúa, ar nampes hé ar caine as hé. 3 Ar hé nostane ar colde yondo, ar antanes i hínan i esse Ér. 
	4 Tá hé nostane ata ar colde yondo, ar hé antane sen i esse Ónan.
	5 Ar an ata hé colde yondo, ar antane sen i esse Hyéla. Ar Yehúra náne mi Cesiv íre hé colde se. 6 Ar Yehúra nampe veri Ér minnónaryan, ar esserya náne Támar. 7 Mal Ér, Yehúro minnóna, náne ulca i Héruo hendusse, ar i Héru tyarne se quale.

CHAPTER 38
And it came  at that time that Judah went down from his brothers, and he remained with an Adullamite man whose name was Hirah. 2 Ar Judah saw there the daughter of a Canaanite man whose name was Shua, and he took that one and lay with her. 3 And she conceived and bore a son, and he gave the child the name Er.
	4 Then she conceived again a son and named him Shelah. And Judah was in Kezib when she bore him. 6 And Judah took a wife to Er his firstborn, and her name was Tamar. 7 But Er, Judah's firstborn, was evil in the eyes of the Lórd, and the Lórd caused him to die.

	8 Ar Yehúra quente Ónan yondoryanna: “Mena hánotyo verinna ar ásen care veruo háno nautie, ar á anta hánotyan hína.” 9 Mal Ónan sinte in i hína lá nauvane vérarya, ar quiquie caines as hánoryo veri, tyarnes i erde lanta to talamenna lá antaven hína hánoryan. 10 Ono ya carnes náne ulca i Héruo hendusse, ar hé tyarne yú sé quale.
	11 Ar Yehúra quente Támarenna, yondoryo veri: “Mara ve nís yeo veru aquálie i coasse ataretyava tenna Hyéla yondonya nauva alinwa.” An sannes: “Sie isse ua qualuva ve hánoryar.” Ar Támar lende ar marne i coasse ataryava.
	12 Tá anda lúme váne, ar qualle Hyúo selye, Yehúro veri. Ar Yehúra hempe i lúme naireva. Tá, uo as meldorya, Ħíra i Arullamya, lendes ama Timnanna innar hocíraner mámaryaron tó.

	8 And Judah said to Onan his son: “Go to your brother's wife and do to her a husband's brother's obligation, and give your brother a child.” 9 But Onan knew that the child was not going to be  his own, and whenever he lay with his brother's wife, he cause the seed to fall unto the ground so as not to give a child to his brother. 10 But what he did was evil in the Lórd's eyes, and he caused also him to die.
	11 And Judah said to Tamar, his son's wife: “Dwell as a woman whose husband has died in the house of your father until Shelah my son shall be grown.” For he thought: “Thus he will not die like his brothers.” And Tamar went and dwelt in the house of her father.
	12 Then a long time passed, and Shua's daughter, Judah's wife, died. And Judah kept the time of grief. Then, together with his friend, Hirah the Adullamite, he went up to Timnah to those that were shearing  his sheep.
	
	13 Ar mo nyarne Támaren: “Yé, verulyo atar eménie ama Timnanna hocirien mámaryaron tó.” 14 Tá panyanes oa insello i larmar naireva teala in anes nís yeo veru náne qualina, ar tompes inse fanwanen ar vaitanexe. Tá hamunes ara i ando Enaímo, ya caita i mallesse Timnanna. An cennes i Hýela sí alinwa ná, ananta únes antana hén ve veri.
	15 Ar Yehúra cenne se, ar intyanes in anes *imbacinde, pan tompelyanes cendelerya. 16 Etta quernes inse senna ar quente senna: “Tula, lava nin caita aselye!” An únes ista i hé náne yondoryo veri. Mal hé quente: “Mana antal nin caitien asinye?” 17 Ar quentes: “Mentauvan lyenna nessa yat lamárenyallo.” Ar hé quente: “Şáquetin qui antal nin varnasse tenna mentalyes.” 18 Tá quentes: “Mana i varnasse ya antauvan lyen?” Ar hé quente: “*Lihtalya ar hempalya ar vandilelya mályasse.” Ar antanes hén tai, ar caines as hé, ar hé nostane sénen. 19 Tá hé oronte ar oante ar nampe oa i fanwa ar colde ata i larmar teala in anes nís yeo veru náne qualina.

	13 And one told Tamar: “Behold, your husband's father has gone up to Timnah to shear his sheep .” 14 Then she put away from herself the clothes of grief indicating that she was a woman whose husband was dead, and she covered herself in a veil and wrapped herself up. Then she sat down by the gate of Enaim, which lies on the road to Timna. For she saw that Shelah was  now an adult, and yet she was not  given to him as a wife.
	15 And Judah saw her, and he supposed that she was a prostitute, since she had covered her face. 16 Therefore he turned to her and said to her: “Come, let me lie with you!” For he did not know that she was his son's wife. But she said: “What do you give me to lie with me?” 17 And he said: “I shall send you a young goat from my flock.” And she said: “I assent if you give me a safety until you send it.” 18 Then he said: “What is the safety that I shall give you?” And she said: “Your seal and your cord and your staff in your hand.” And he gave her those, and he lay as her, and she conceived by him. 19 Then she arose and went off and took away the weild and wore again the garments indicating that she was a woman whose husband was dead.

	20 Ar Yehúra mentane i nessa yat i mánen meldoryo, i Arullamya, ñetien nan i varnasse ya i nís hempelyane, mal únes hire hé. 21 Ar maquentes i nerinnar i nómesse yasse hé nélyane: “Masse i *cordimbacinde ye náne mi Enaïm, ara i malle?” Mal quentelte: “Lá anaie sis *cordimbacinde.”
	22 Ar nanwennes Yehúranna ar quente: “Uan ihírie se, ar yú i nómeo neri quenter: Lá anaie sís *cordimbacinde.” 23 Ar Yehúra quente: “Lava sen hepe sa, pustien vet návello nucumne. Yé, mentanen sina nessa yat, mal elye ua hirne se.”

	20 And Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his friend, the Adullamite, to get back the safety that the woman had kept, but he did not find her. 21 And he asked the men at the place where she  had been: “Where is the temple prostitute that was in Enaim, by the road?” But they said: “ has not been here  temple prostitute.” 
	22 And he returned to Judah and said: “I did not find her, and also the men of the place said:  has not been here  temple prostitute.” 23 And Judah said: “Let her keep it, to stop us from being shamed. Behold, I send this young goat, but you did not find her.”

	24 Ar túle, íre *os astar nelde náne vanwe, i mo nyarne Yehúran: “Támar, yondolyo veri, elengie ve *imbacinde! Ente, náse as hína lengiénen ve *imbacinde!” Ar Yehúra quente: “Áse tala etsenna náven urtana!” 
	25 Íre hé náne talaina ettanna, hé mentane veruryo atarenna ar quente: “I nernen ye sáme nati sine inye as hína ná!” Ente, hé quente: “Mecin, ceşa mano nati sine nar: i *lihta ar i hempar ar i vandil.”
	26 Ar Yehúra sinte tai, ar quentes: “Náse faila lá ní, an uan antane se Hyéla yondonyan.” Mal uas caine as hé ata.
	27 Mí lúme yasse hé columne, yé, enger onóni mónaryasse. 28 Ar túle, lan hé cólane, in er i lapsion éle márya ompa, ar i *ammestáme nunte carne hempa *os márya, quétala: “Si ettúle minya.” 29 Mal tunces márya nan, ar hánorya ettúle, ar i *ammestáme quente: “Manen rúvatye etsenna!” Etta ñentes i esse Peres (Ruvie). 30 Ar epeta ettúle hánorya, arwa i carne hempo máryasse, ar ñentes i esse Seraħ.

	24 And it came , when around three months were passed, that one told Judah: “Tamar, your son's wife, has behaved like a prostitute! Furthermore, she is with child by behaving as a prostitute!” And Judah said: “Bring her out to be burnt!”
	25 When she was being brought outside, she sent to her husband's father and said: “By the man who had these things I am with child!” Furthermore, she said: “Please, examine whose these things are: the seal and the cords and the staff.”
	26 And Judah knew them, and he said: “She is more just that I, for I did not give her to Shelah my son.” But he did now lie with her again.
	27 In the time when she was going to bear, behold,  were twins in her womb. 28 And  came , while she was giving birth, that one of the babies thrust his hand forward, and the midwife tied a red cord around his hand, saying: “This one came out first.” 29 But he pulled his hand back, and his brother came out, and the midwife said: “How you are bursting out!” Therefore he got the name Perez (Bursting). 30 And thereafter his brother came out, having the red cord on his hand, and he got the name Zerah.

RANTA 39 
Mal Yósef náne talana undu Mirrandorenna, ar Potifar –  Fáro arandur, hér i cundoron, Mirra nér – mancane se insen ho i Ismaelyar i taller se undu tar. 2 Ono i Héru náne as Yósef, ar hé olle herenya nér, ar hé lemne i coasse Mirra héryava. 3 Ar hérya cenne in i Héru náse as hé, ar in ilqua ya hé cára, i Héru care herenya máryasse.
	4 Ar Yósef hirne lisse mí Mirro hendu, ar anes núro sen. Ar hérya antane sen i ortírie coaryava, ar ilqua ya sámes, panyanes Yósefo manna. 5 Ar túle in i lúmello ya antanes sen i ortírie coaryava ar ilquava ya sámes, i Héru aistane i coa i Mirrava castanen Yósefo, ar i Héruo aistie enge ilquasse ya sámes, i coasse ar i restasse. 6 Ar hehtanes ilqua ya sámes mi Yósefo má, ar arwa isseo tasse, cimnes munta hequa i massa ya mantes. 

CHAPTER 39
But Joseph was brought down to Egypt, and Potiphar – a king's servant of Pharaoh's, master of the guards, an Egyptian man – traded him to himself from the Ishmaelites that brought him down thither. 2 But the Lórd was with Joseph, and he became a successful  man, and he remained in the house of his Egyptian master. 3 And his master saw that the Lórd was  with him, and that everything that he was  doing, the Lórd made  successful in his hand.
	4 And Joseph found grace in the Egyptian's eyes, and he was a servant to him. And his master gave him the oversight of his house, and everything that he had, he put into Joseph's hand. 5 And it came  that from the time that he gave him the oversight of his house, and of everything that he had, the Lórd blessed the house of the Egyptian by reason of Joseph, and the Lórd's blessing was on everything that he had, in the house and in the field. 6 And he abandoned everything that he had in Joseph's hand, and having him there, he heeded nothing except the bread that he ate.

	Ar Yósef náne vanima mi hroa ar vanima mi nemeste. 7 Ar túle apa nati sine i héryo veri hante henduryat Yósefenna, ar quentes: “Á caita óni!” 8 Mal hé váquente, ar hé quente héryo verinna: “Yé, hérinya, arwa inyeo, ua ista mana ea i coasse, ar apánies ilqua ya samis mányanna. 9 Uas túra coa sinasse lá ní, ar uas váequétie nin erya nat hequa lyé, pan elye verirya ná. Tá manen ece nin care túra ulco sina ar úcare Erun?” 10 Ár ómu quétanes Yósefenna aure apa aure, hé váquente lasta senna, caitien óse hya náven óse. 

	And Joseph was beautiful in body and beautiful in appearance. 7 And it came  after these things that his master's wife threw her eyes on Joseph, and she said: “Lie with me!” But he refused, and he said to his master's wife: “Behold, my master, having me, does not know what is in the house, and he has put everything that he has into my hand. 9 He is not greater in this house than me, and he has not refused me a single thing except you, since you are his wife. Then how is it possible for me to do this great evil and sin against God?” 10 And though she was speaking to Joseph day after day, he refused to listen to her,  to lie with her or to be with her.

	11 Mal túle i aure yasse hé lende mir i coa carien molierya, ar lá enge aiquen imíca i cavo neri tasse i coasse. 12 Ar nampes hé larmaryanen, quétala: “Á caita óni!” Mal hé hehtane larmarya máryasse ar úşe ar norne etsenna.   
	13 Ar túle, íre cennes i hé hehtanelyane larmarya máryasse ar úşelyane etsenna, 14 i yaldes i cavo neri ar carampe téna, quétala: “Cena, verunya atálie venna Heverya nér tyalien mici vi! Hé túle ninna caitien óni, mal yámen túra ómanen. 15 Ar íre hé hlasse in ortanen ómanya ar yáme, hé hehtane larmarya óni ar úşe ar norne etsenna.”
	16 Ar hempes i larma ara se, tenna Yósefo hér túle i coanna. 17 Ar carampes senna sie, quétela: “I Heverya núro ya atálietye venna mittane ninna tyalien óni. 18 Mal íre ortanen ómanya ar yáme, hehtanes larmarya ara ni ar úşe etsenna.”

	11 But  came the day when he went into the house to do his work, and  was not anyone among the men of the house in the house. 12 And she took him by his garment, saying: “Lie with me!” But he abandoned his garment in her hand and fled and ran outside.
	13 And it came , when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled outside, 14 that she called the men of the house and spoke to them, saying: “See, my husband has brought to us a Hebrew man to play among us! He came to me to lie with me, but I cried with a great voice. 15 And when he heard that I raised my voice and cried, he left his garmed with me and fled outside.”
	16 And she kept the garment by her, until Joseph's master came to the house. 17 And she spoke to him so, saying:  “The Hebrew servant that you have brought to us came in to me to play with me. But when I raised my voice and cried, he abandoned his garment by me and fled outside.”
	
	19 Ar íre hérya hlasse veriryo quettar, manen hé quente: Sie núrotya carne nin, rúşerya náne nartana. 20 Ar Yósefo hér nampe se ar panyane se i mandosse, i nóme yasse i arano nútinar náner hépaine, ar hé lemne tasse i mandosse. 21 Mal i Héru náne as Yósef ar náne raina sen, ar antanes sen lisse mi hendu i turo i mando. 22 Ar i tur i mando antane mir Yósefo má ilye i nútinar i enger i mandosse, ar ilqua ya náne cáraina tasse náne cáraina lo hé. 23 I tur i mando ua cimne erya nat ya náne mi ortírierya, an i Héru náne as Yósef, ar ya hé carne, i Héru carne herenya.

	19 And when his master heard his wife's words, how she said: Thus your servant did to me, his wrath was kindled. 20 And Joseph's master took him and put him in prison, the place where the king's bound ones were being kept, and he remained there in the prison. 21 But the Lórd was with Joseph and was gracious to him, and he gave him grace in the eyes of the chief of the prison. 22 And the chief of the prison gave into Joseph's hand all the bound ones that were in the prison, and everything that was being done there was being done by him. 23 The chief of the prison did not heed a single thing that was in his oversight, for the Lórd was with Joseph, and what he did, the Lórd made successful.

RANTA 40 
Ar túle apa nati sine i Mirrandoro arano yulmacolindo ar *mastandorya úcarner heruttan, i aran Mirrandoro. 2 Ar Fáro náne rúşea ana arandurya atta, ana i héra yulmacolindo ar ana i héra *mastando. 3 Ar panyanes tu nu tirie i coasse i héro i cundoron, mir i mando, i nóme yasse Yósef náne nútina. 4 Ar i hér i cundoron tu-panyane Yósefo ortíriesse, ar hé náne núro tun, ar lemnette nu tirie ter réli. 
	5 Tá ólane yúyon mici tu, ilya nér camila véra olorya mí imya lóme, ilya nero olos arwa satya cendiéno i yulmacolindon ar i *mastandon i arano Mirrandoro, i náner nútine mandosse. 
	6 Ar Yósef túle minna túna i arinde ar cenne tú, ar yé, anette nairie. 7 Ar maquentes Fáro arandurinnar i naner óse nu tirie mi heruryo coa, quétala: “Manen ná i cendelesta lue síra?” 8 Ar quentette senna: “Olos utúlie menta, mal lá ea aiquen yen ece cenda sa.” Ono Yósef quente túna: “Ma cendier uar Erun? Mecin, ása nyare nin!”

CHAPTER 40
And it happened  after these things that the king of Egypt's cupbearer and his baker sinned against their lord, the king of Egypt. 2 And Pharaoh was wroth against his two officials, against the chief cupbearer and against the chief baker. 3 And he put them under guard in the house of the master of the guards, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound. 4 And the master of the gueards put them in Joseph's oversight, and he was a servant to them, and they remained under guard for some days.
	5 Then both of them dreamed, each man receiving his own dream in the same night, each man's dream having its separate reading  for the cupbearer and for the baker of the king of Egypt, that were bound in prison.
	6 And Joseph came inside to them in the morning and saw them, and behold, they were sorrowful. 7 And he asked Pharaoh's offcials that were with him under guard in his lord's house, saying: “How is  that your face is sad today?” 8 And they said to him: “A dream has come to us , but  is not anyone who is able to read it.” But Joseph said to them: “Are readings not for God? Please, tell it to me!”

	9 Ar i héra *mastando nyarne olorya Yósefen, ar quentes: “Olorinyasse, yé, liantasse enge epe ni. 10 Ar mí liantasse enger olvar nelde, ar apa carnes tuimar, lostanes lohte. Loxeryar canter manwe *tiumar. 11 Ar i yulma Fárova enge mányasse, ar nampen i *tiumar ar şangane tai mir i yulma Fárova, ar antanen i yulma mir Fáro má.” 12 Ar Yósef quente senna: “Si cendierya ná: I olvar nelde nar rí nelde. 13 Íre rí nelde avánier, Fáro ortauva carelya ar antauva lyen nan nómelya, ar antauval i yulma Fárova mir márya, ve carnel íre anel yulmacolindorya. 14 Mal áni enyale íre haruval máriesse, ar mecin, ánin anta lisse ar queta pa ni Fáronna, ar áni tala et coa sinallo. 15 An é anen pílina et i nórello Heveryaron, ar yú sisse acárien munta náven panyana mandosse.”

	9 And the chief baker told his dream to Joseph, and he said: “In my dream, see, a vine was before me. 10 And in the vine  were three branches, and after they made buds, they blossomed forth blossom. Their clusters formed ripe grapes. 11 And the cup of Pharaoh was in my hand, and I took the grapes and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.” 12 And Joseph said to him: “This is its reading: The three branches are three days. 13 When three days have passed, Pharaoh will raise up your head and give you back your position, and you will give the cup into Pharaoh's hand, as you did when you were his cupbearer. 14 But recall me when you will be doing well , and please, give me grace and speak about me to Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. 15 For I was indeed stolen out of the hand of the Hebrews, and also here I have done nothing to be put in prison.”

	16 Íre i héra *mastando túne in i cendie mára ná, quentes Yósefenna: “Yú inye yente olorinyasse, ar yé, colcar nelde ninqui massaron enger to carinya, 17 ar i inga colcasse enge ilya nostale mastana mattava Fáron. Mal i aiwi manter tai et i colcallo to carinya.”
	18 Ar hanquente ar eque Yósef: “Si cendierya ná: I colcar nelde nar rí nelde. 19 Íre rí nelde avánier, Fáro ortauva carelya to lyello, ar linguvas lye aldasse, ar i aiwi matuvar hrávelya to lyello.”
	20 Ar túle i neldea auresse, ya náne Fáro nostare, i carnes meren ilye núroryain, ar ortanes i héra yulmacolindo cas ar i héra *mastando cas mici núroryar. 21 Ar antanes i héra yulmacolindon nan nómerya ve yulmacolindo, ar hé antane i yulma mir Fáro má. 22 Mal i héra *mastando linganes, ve náne i cendie ya Yósef antanelyane tun. 
	23 Ananta i héra yulmacolindo ua enyalde Yósef; hé talante *réneryallo.

	16 When the chief baker perceived that the reading was  good, he said to Joseph: “I too looked in my dream, and behold, three boxes of white breads were on my head, 17 and in the topmost box  was ever kind of baked food for Pharaoh. But the birds ate them out of the box on my head.”
	18 And Joseph answered and said: “This is its reading: The three boxes are three days. 19 When three days have passed, Pharaoh will raise your head from on you, and he will hang you on a tree, and the birds will eat your flesh from on you.”
	20 And it came  on the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feat for all his servants, and he lifted up the chielf cupbearer's head and the chief baker's head among his servants. 21 And he gave the chief cupbearer back his place as cupbearer, and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand. 22 But the chief baker he hanged, as was  the reading that Joseph had given them.
	23 And yet the chief cupbearer did not recall Joseph; he slipped from his memory.

RANTA 41 
Ar túle, íre quanta loa atta vánelyanet, in ólane Fáron, ar yé, táranes ara i Níl. 2 Ar yé, túler ama et i Nílello yaxir otso, vanime mi nemeste ar lárie mi hráve, ar lendelte nesselenna imíca i lisci. 
	3 Mal yé, túler ama an yaxir otso apa te, úvanime mi nemeste ar úlárie mi hráve, ar tarnelte ara i hyane yaxir i Nílo fárasse. 4 Ar i yaxir i náner úvanime mi nemeste ar úlárie mi hráve ammanter i yaxir otso i náner vanime mi nemeste ar lárie mi hráve. Tá Fáro *eccuinune.

CHAPTER 41
And it came , when two full years had passed, that Pharaoh dreamt, and behold, he was stading by the Nile. 2 And behold,  came up out of the river seven cows, beautiful in appearence and fat in flesh, and they went to pastrure among the sedges. 
	3 And behold,  came up also seven more cows after them, ugly in appearance and meagre in flesh, and they stood next to the other cows on the bank of the Nile. 4 And the cows that were ugly in appearance and meagre in flesh consumed the seven cows beautiful in appearance and fat in flesh. Then Pharaoh woke up.

	5 Ono nanwennes húmenna, ar ólane sen ata. Ar yé, cari otso oriva túler ama er sirpesse, quante ar máre. 6 Mal yé, cari otso oriva tuianer apa tai, *hlinye ar hestane i rómesúrinen. 7 Ar i *hlinye cari oriva ammanter i lárie ar quante cari oriva. Tá Fáro *eccuinune ar hanyane i ta olos né.

	5 But he returned to sleep, and he dreamed again. And behold, seven heads of grain came up on one stalk, full and good. 6 But behold, seven heads of grain came up after them, thin and withered by the east-wind. 7 And the thin heads of grain consumed the fat and full heads of grain. Then Pharaoh awoke and understood that that was a dream.

	8 Ar túle mí arin i fairerya náne valtana sesse, ar mentanes ar tultane Mirrandoro sairondi ar sailar, ar Fáro nyarne tien olorya. Mal lá enge quén ye sinte cenda sa Fáron.
	9 Tá i héra yulmacolindo carampe, quétala: “Úcarinyar enyálan síra. 10 Fáro náne rúşea núroryannar ar panyane ni mandosse, i coasse i héro i cundoron – ni ar i héra *mastando. 11 Ar ólane ment mí imya lóme, inyen ar issen; ólane ilyan mici met ve i cendie oloryava. 12 Ar enge tasse asemme Heverya seldo, núro héro i cundoron, ar nyarnemme sen olorimmar, ar cendanes tu. Ilqueno véra olos cendanes.  13 Ar túle i tambe cendanes ment, síve olle: Inye ñente nan nómenya moliéva, ar isse náne lingana.”

	8 And it came  in the morning that his spirit was agitated in him, and he sent and summoned Egypt's wizards and wise ones, and Pharaoh told them his dream. But  was not a person who could read it for Pharaoh.
	9 Then the chief cupbearer spoke, saying: “My sins I recall today. 10 Pharaoh was wroth against his servants and put me in prison, in the house of the master of the guards – me and the chief baker. 11 And we dreamed in the same night, I and he; we dreamed each among us according to the reading of his dream. 12 And  was there with us a Hebrew boy, a servant of the master of the guards, and we told him our dreams, and he read them. Each one's own dream he read. 13 And it came  that as he read for us, so  became: I received back my place of work, and he was hanged.”

	14 Tá Fáro mentane ar tultane Yósef, ar tallelte hé hormenen et i mandollo. Ar hé aucirne fangarya ar vistane larmarma ar túle Fáronna.
	15 Ar quente Fáro Yósefenna: “Olos utúlie nin, ar lá ea quén yen ece cenda sa. Mal inye ahlárie pa lyé in íre hlaril olos, istal sa-cenda.” 16 Mal Yósef hanquente Fáronna: “Inye ua ture sa. Eru antauva Fáron hanquenta ya tala márie Fáronna.”

	14 Then Pharaoh send and summoned Joseph, and they brought him with haste out of the prison. And he cut off his beard and changed his garment and came to Pharaoh.
	15 And Pharaoh said to Joseph: “A dream has come to me, and  is no person for whom it is possible to read it. But I have heard about you that when you hear a dream, you know how to read it.” 16 But Joseph said to Pharaoh: “I do not control it. God will give Pharaoh an answer that brings happiness to Pharaoh.”

	17 Ar Fáro quente Yósefenna: “Olorinyasse, yé, táranen i Nílo fárasse. 18 Ar yé, i Nílello túler ama yaxir otso, lárie mi hráve ar vanime mi nemeste, ar lendelte nesselenna imíca i lisci. 19 Mal yé, hyane yaxir otso túler ama apa te, penye ar ita úvanime mi nemeste ar úlárie mi hráve. Uan ecénie yaxir ta urre mi quanda Mirrandor. 20 Ar i úlárie ar úvanime yaxir manter i minye lárie yaxir otso. 21 Mal íre túlelyanelte mir cumbalta, mo ua sinte in ammátieltet, mal nemestelta náne en tambe úvanima síve anes i yestasse. Tá *eccuinunenye.

	17 And Pharaoh said to Joseph: “In my dream, behold, I was standing on the bank of the Nile. 18 And behold, out of the Nile  came up seven cows, fat in flesh and beautiful in appearance, and they went to pasture among the sedges. 19 But behold, seven other cows came up after them, lacking and very ugly in appearance and poor in flesh. I have not seen cows that bad in all of Egypt. 20 And the lean and ugly cows ate the first fat seven cows. 21 But when they had come into their stomach, one did not know that they had  consumed them, but their appearance was still as ugly as it was in the beginning. Then I awoke.

	22 Epeta ólane nin ata, ar cennen manen cari otso túler ama er sirpesse, quante ar máre. 23 Mal yé, cari orio otso – hestane, *hlinye, ar urtane i rómesurinen – túler ama apa tai.  24 Ar i *hlinye cari ammanter i máre cari otso. Ar carampen i saironnnar, mal lá enge aiquen ye sinte nyare nin mana tenges.”

	22 Thereafter I dreamed again, and I saw how seven heads came up on one stalk, full and good. 23 But behold, seven heads of grain – withered, lean, and burnt by the east wind – came up after them. 24 And the lean heads consumed the good seven heads. And I spoke to the wizards, but  was not anyone who could  tell me what it meant.

	25 Ar Yósef quente Fáronna: “Fáro olos er ná. Ya Eru cára anyáries Fáron. 26 I máre yaxir otso nar loar otso, ar i máre cari oriva otso nar loar otso. I olos er ná. 27 Ar i úlárie ar úvanime yaxir otso i túler ama apa te nar loar otso, ar yú i luste cari orio otso urtane i rómesúrinen. Nauvalte loar otso saiceléva. 28 I natto ná ve quenten Fáronna: ya Eru cára atánies Fáron. 28 Yé, tuluvar loar otso túra úveva mí quanda Mirrandor. 30 Mal apa tai tuluvar loar otso saiceléva, ar i quanda úve firuva enyaliello Mirrandoresse, ar i saicele ammatuva i nóre. 31 Ar i úve lá nauva sinwa i nóresse castanen i saicele ya hilya, an nauvas ita hranga. 32 Ar pa i olos nála atwa, tulila Fáronna lú atta, ta tea in i natto anaie tulcana lo Eru, ar Eru ron tyaruva sa marta.
	
	25 And Joseph said to Pharaoh: “Pharaoh's dream is one. What God is doing he has told Pharaoh. 26 The seven good cows are seven years, and the good heads of grain are seven years. The dream is one. 27 And the meagre and ungly seven cows that came up after them are seven years, and  also the empty heads of grain scorched by the east-wind. They shall be seven years of famine. 28 The matter is like I said to Pharaoh: what God is doing he has shown to Pharaoh. 28 Behold,  will come seven years of great abundance in all Egypt. 30 But after them  shall come seven years of famine, and the whole abundance shall fade from recall in Egypt, and the famine will consume the land. 31 And about the dream being double, coming to Pharaoh two times, that means that the matter has been established by God, and God will soon cause it to happen.

	33 Ar sí, nai Fáro ciluva handa ar saila nér, ar áse panya or Mirrandor. 34 Nai Fáro caruva sie, ar nai panyuvas ennoli ortirien i nóre, ar nai mapuvalte i lepesta i orio Mirrandoro mí loar otso úveva. 35 Ar nai comyauvalte ilya nostaleo matta mi sine máre loar yar tuluvar, ar nai hostuvalte ore nu Fáro hére i ostossen, ar nai hepuvaltes. 36 Ar i matta nauva tíraina i nóren tenna i loar otso saiceléva yar euvar Mirrandoresse, pustien i nóre návello nancarna i saicelénen.”

	33 And now, may Pharaoh choose an intelligent and wise man, and put him over Egypt. 34 May Pharaoh do so, and may he put people to oversee the land, and may he take the fifth part of the grain of Egypt in the seven years of abundance. 35 And may they gather every kind of food in these good years that shall come, and may they gather grain under Pharaoh's lordship in the cities, and may they keep it. 36 And the food shall be guarded for the land until the seven years of famine that shall be in Egypt, to stop the land from being undone by the famine.”

	37 Ar i natto mára né mi Fáro hendu, ar mi ilye núroryaron hendu. 38 Ar Fáro quente núroryannar: “Ma ece ven hire nér ve si, nér yesse Eruo faire ea?” 39 Ar Fáro quente Yósefenna: “Pan Eru atánie elyen ilya si, lá ea nér tambe handa ar saila síve lyé. 40 Nauval or coanya, ar quettalyanen quanda lienya nauva túraina. Rie mahalmanya panyuva ni or lyé.” 41 Ar Fáro quente Yósefenna: “Yé, apánien lye or quanda Mirrandor.” 42 Ar Fáro nampe i mille *lihtava máryallo ar panyane sa to Yósefo má, ar tompeses larmalínen *páşeva, ar panyanes limil maltava *os axerya. 43 Ar tyarneses lelya mí tatya norolle ya sámes, ar yámelte epe se: “Avrec!”, ar panyanéses or quanda Mirrandor.

	37 And the matter was good in Pharaoh's eyes, and in the eyes of all his servants. 38 And Pharaoh said to his servants: “Is it possible for us to find a man like this, a man in whom God's spirit is?” 39 And Pharaoh said to Joseph: “Since God has shown you all this,  is not  man so intelligent and wise as you. 40 You shall be over my house, and by your word all my people shall be ruled. Only my throne will place me above you.” 41 And Pharaoh said to Joseph: “Behold, I have placed you over all Egypt.” 42 And Pharaoh took the signet ring from his hand and put it on Joseph's hand, and he covered him in garments of linen, and he put a chain of gold around his neck. 42 And he caused him to travel in the second chariot that he had, and they cried before him: “Abrech!”, and he placed him over all Egypt.

	44 Ar Fáro quente Yósefenna: “Inye Fáro, mal pen elye *úquen ortauva márya hya talya mi quanda Mirrandor.” 45 Ar Fáro estane Yósef i essenen Safenat-Panéaħ, ar antanes sen ve veri Ásenat selyerya Pófifera, i *airimo mi Ón. Ar Yósef etelende ter Mirrandor. 46 Ar Yósef sáme loar *nelequean íre tarnes epe Fáro, aran Mirrandoro. Ar Yósef lende epe Fárollo ar lahtane ter quanda Mirrandor. 47 Ar i loassen otso úveva i cemen colde mi cumbeli. 48 Ar comyanes ilya i matta mi loar otso i túler or Mirrandor, ar panyanes i matta i ostossen. I matta i resto ya pelde ilya osto panyanes enderyasse.

	44 And Pharaoh said to Joseph: “I  Pharaoh, but without you no one will lift his hand or foot in all Egypt.” 45 And Pharaoh called Joseph by the name Zaphenath-Paneah, and he gave him as wife Asenath the daughter of Potiphera, the priest in On. And Joseph went out through Egypt. 46 And Joseph had  thirty years when he stood before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. And Joseph went before Pharaoh and passed through all Egypt. 47 And in the seven years of abundance the earth bore in heaps. 48 And he gathered all the food in the seven years that came over Egypt, and he put the food in the cities. The food of the field that surrounded every city he put in its midst.

	49 Ar Yósef comyane ore ve earo litse, lesta ita hoa, tenna pustanelte notitas, an anes nóte pella. 50 Ar Yósefen nánet nóne yondo atta nó i loar saiceléva túler, i colde sen Ásenat, selyerya Potifera i *airimo mi Ón. 51 Ar Yósef antane i minnónan i esse Manasse (Ye Tyare Talta Enyaliello), “an Eru atyárie talta enyaliello ilya mótienya ar i quanda nosse atarinyo”. 52 Ar i attea yondon antanes i esse Efraïm (Yavila), “an Eru atyárie nin yave mí nore yasse moianen.”
	53 Ar váner i loar otso úveva yar enger Mirrandoresse. 54 Tá túle i yesta i loaron otso saiceléva, ar enge saicele ilye nóressen, mal quanda Mirrandoresse enge massa. 55 Ar íre quanda Mirrandor náne saicelea, i lie yáme Fáronna massan, ar Fáro quente ilye i Mirrannar: “Mena Yósefenna. Alde care ya quetis lenna.”

	49 And Joseph gathered grain like the sand of the sea, an extremely great measure, until they stopped counting it, for it was beyond number. 50 And to Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, that Asenath, daughter of Potiphera the priest in On, bore to him. 51 And Joseph gave to the first the name Manasseh (Who Causes To Slip From Recall), “for God has cased to slip from recall all my toiling and the whole kin of my father”. 52 And to the second son he gave the name Ephraim (Bearing Fruit), “for God has caused me to bear fruit in the land in which I was afflicted.”
	53 And the seven years of abundance that were in Egypt passed. 54 Then came the beginning of the seven years of famine, and  was famine in all lands, but in all of Egypt  was bread. 55 And when all Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread, and Pharaoh said to the Egyptians: “Go to Joseph. You do what he says to you.”

	56 Ar i saicele enge quanda palúresse cemeno. Tá Yósef pantane ilye i haurar ar vance i Mirrain, ar i saicele hranga né quanda Mirrandoresse. 57 Ar i quanda cemen túle mir Mirrandor Yósefenna mancien inten ore, an i saicele hranga né mí quanda cemen.

	56 And the famine was on the entire surface of earth. Then Joseph opened all the stores and sold to the Egyptians, and the famine was harsh in all Egypt. 57 And all the earth came into Egypt to Joseph to trade to themselves grain, for the famine was harsh in all the earth.

RANTA 42 
Sí Yácov parne in enge ore Mirrandoresse, ar Yácov quente yondoryannar: “Manen ná i yétalde quén i exennar?” 2 Ar quentes: “Yé, ahlárien in ea ore Mirrandoresse. Alde unta tar ar áven manca talo. Sie coituvalve ar ualve qualuva.”
	3 Ar Yósefo hánor quean ununter mancien inten ore Mirrandorello. 4 Mal Venyamin, Yósefo háno, Yácov ua mentane as hánoryar, an quentes: “Pustien malie martiello sen.” 
	5 Ar Israélo yondor túler mancien inte matta imíca i túler, an i saicele hranga né Canáan·nóresse. 6 Ar Yósef náne i nórecáno or i nóre; isse náne ye vance i quanda lien i nóreo. Ar Yósefo hánor túler, ar cumbelte senna, cendelelta i talamenna. 

CHAPTER 42
Now Jacob learnt that  was grain in Egypt, and Jacob said to his sons: “How is  that you are looking one at the others?” 2 And he said: “Behold, I have heard that  is grain in Egypt. You go down thither and trade to us  from there. Thus we will live and not die.”
	3 And Jacob's ten brothers went down to trade to themselves grain from Egypt. 4 But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob did not send with his brothers, for he said: “To stop harm from happening to him.”
	5 And Israel's sons came to trade to themselves food among  who came, for the famine was hard in the land of Canaan. 6 And Joseph was the governor over the land; he was  that sold to the whole people of the land. And Joseph's brothers came, and they bowed to him, their face towards the ground.

	7 Ar Yósef cenne hánoryar, ar sinteset, mal carnes inse ettelea tien, ar carampes téna mi naraca lé. Ar quentes téna: “Mallo utúlielde?” Ar quentelte: “Canáan·nórello mancien immen matta.”
	8 Ar Yósef sinte hánoryar, mal té uar hanyane man isse né. 9 Ar Yósef enyalde i olori yar túler senna pa té, ar quentes téna: “Nalde larmor! Cenien masse i nóre ua varyaina utúlielde!” 10 Ono quentelte senna: “Lá, herunya, mal núrolyar utúlier mancien inten matta. 11 Nalme er nero yondor. Nalme faile. Núrolyar uar larmor.” 12 Mal quentes téna: “Lá! An utúlielde cenien masse i nóre ua varyaina!”

	7 And Joseph saw his brotehrs, and he knew them, but he made himself foreign to them, and he spoke to them in a harsh manner. And he said to them: “From where have you come?” And they said: “From the land of Canaan to trade to ourselves food.”
	8 And Joseph knew his brothers, but they did not understand who he was. 9 And Joseph recalled the dreams that came to him concerning them, and he said to them: “You are spies! To see where the land is not protected you have come!” 10 But they said to him: “No, my lord, but your servants have come to trade to themselves food. 11 We are the sons of one man. We are just. Your servants are not spies.” 12 But he said to them: “No! For you have come to see where the land is not protected!”

	13 Ar quentelte: “Elme núrolyar nar hánor yunque, er nero yondor Canáan·nóresse, ar yé, i amnessa ná as atarya síra, ar er vanwa ná.” 14 Mal Yósef quente téna: “I natto ná ve equétien lenna: Nalde larmor! 15 Sinen nauvalde tyastane: Ve Fáro coita, ualde etelelyuvalde silo, qui amnessa hánolda ua tule sir. 16 Á menta er ho mici le, ar nai isse tultauva hánolda, mal elde nauvar nútine, tyastien quettalyar, cenien qui quetilde i nanwie. Ar qui laialde – ve Fáro coita, é nalde larmor!” 17 Ar panyanes illi mici te uo mandosse ter rí nelde. 

	13 And they said: “We your servants are twelve brothers, one man's sons in the land of Canaan, and behold, the youngest is with his brothers today, and one is gone.” 14 But Joseph said to them: “The matter is like I have said to you: You are spies! 15 By this you will be tested: As Pharaoh lives, you will not go forth from here, if your youngest brother does not come hither. 16 Send one from among you, and may he fetch your brother, but you shall be bound, to test your words, to see if you speak the truth. And if you do not – as Pharaoh lives, indeed you are spies!” 17 And he put all among them together in prison for three days. 

18 Ar Yósef quente téna i neldea auresse: “Cara sie ar á coita, an Erullo inye ruce. 19 Qui nalde faile neri, nai er mici hánoldar lemya mí mando yasse engelde, mal elde, mena, cola ore i saicelen nosseldannar. 20 Tá á tala ninna amnessa hánolda. Sie quettaldar nauvar tyastane, ar ualde qualuva.” Ar carnelte sie.

	18 And Joseph said to them on the third day: “Do so and live, for God I fear. 19 If you are righteous men, may one among your brothers remain in the prison in which you were, but you, go, carry grain for the famine to your families. 20 Then bring to me your youngest brother. Thus your words shall be tested, and you will not die.” And they did so.

	21 Ar quentelte, quén i exenna: “É colive cáma pa hánonya, an cennelve fearyo şangie íre íquanes vi, mal váquentelme lasta. Etta şangie sina utúlie venna.”
	22 Ar Rëuven hanquente téna, quétala: “Ma uan carampe lenna, quétala: Áva care ulco i hínan – ? Mal elde uar merne lasta. Etta yú sercerya ná cestaina nan.”
	23 Ono ualte sinte i Yósef hanyane te, an náne *querindo imbi te.
	24 Ar quernes inse oa tello, ar nieryar uller. Tá nanwennes téna ar carampe téna, ar nampes Símon ho mici te ar nunte se opo hendultat. 25 Tá Yósef canne i mo quantumne colcaltar orinen, ar i mo panyumne ilya nero telpe nan mir pocorya, ar i mo antauvane tien matta i lendan. Ar sie náne carna tien.

	21 And they said, one to the other: “Indeed we carry guilt about our brother, for we saw the tribulation of his soul when he was begging us, but we refused to listen. Therefore this tribulation has come upon us.”
	22 And Reuben answered them, saying: “Did I not speak to you, saying: Do not do evil to the child – ? But you did not want to listen. Therefore also his blood is being sought back.”
	23 But they did not know that Joseph understood them, for there was an interpreter between them.
	24 And he turned himself away from them, and his tears flowed. Then he returned to them and spoke to them, and he took Simon from among them and bound him before their eyes. 25 Then Joseph commanded that one was to fill their vessels  with grain, that one was to put each man's money back into his sack, and that one was to give them food for the journey. And so was done to them.
	
	26 Ar panyanelte orilta to *pellopoltar ar oanter talo. 27 Mal íre quén mici te pantane pocorya antaven *pelloporyan matso i nómesse yasse serumnelte ter i lóme, cennes telperya tasse mí poco anto. 28 Ar quentes hánoryannar: “Telpenya anaie panyana nan! Ela, sisse eas poconyasse!” Ar endalta nunte, ar pálala querneltexer quén i exenna, quétala: “Mana nat sina ya Eru acárie ven?” 

	26 And they put their grain on their donkeys and went away from there. 27 But when one among them opened his sack to give his doney fodder in the place where they were going to rest through the night, he saw his money there in the mouth of the sack. 28 And he said to his brothers: “My money has been put back! Behold, here it is in my sack!” And they heart sank, and trembling they turned one to the other, saying: “What is this thing that God has done to us?”

29 Ar túlelte Yácov atareltanna Canáan·nóresse, ar nyarnelte sen ilqua martienwa tien, quétala: 30 “I nér, i nóreo heru, carampe menna mi naraca lé, ar sannes in nalme *ettíror ceşila i nóre. 31 Ar quentelme senna: Nalme faile; ualme *ettíror! 32 Nalme hánor yunque, atarelmo yondor. Er vanwa ná, ar i amnessa ná as atarelma Canáan·nóresse. 33 Ar i nér, i nóreo heru, quente menna: Sinen istuvan i nalde faile: Lava er mici hánoldar lemya asinye, ar á mapa i saicelematta nosseldain ar á lelya. 34 Ar á tala amnessa hánolda ninna. Sie istuvan in ualde *ettíror, mal nar faile. Hánolda antauvan len, ar i nóresse lertuvalde lelya yasse merilde.” 

29 And they came to Jacob their father in the land of Canaan, and they told him everything having happened to them, saying:30 “The man, the lord of the land, spoke to us in a harsh manner, and he thought that we were spies searching out the land. 31 And we said to him: We are righteous, we are not spies! 32 We are twelve brothers, our father's sons. One is gone, and the youngest is with his father in the land of Canaan. 34 And the man, the lord of the land, said to us: By this I will know that you are not spies, but are righteous: Your brother I will give to you, and in the land you may travel where you want.”

	35 Ar túle íre *lustanelte pocoltar i yé, ilya nero vaitana lanne telpeo ná pocoryasse, ar íre té ar atarelta cenner vaitane lanneltar telpeo, rúcanelte.
	36 Ar Yácov atarelta quente téna: “Nillo amápielde hínanyar. Yósef vanwa ná, ar Símon vanwa ná, ar Venyamin mapuvalde oa. Inyenna ilye nati sine utúlier.”
	37 Ar Rëuven carampe ataryanna, quétala: “Lertatye nahta yondonya atta, qui uan taluva se nan tyenna. Áse anta mányanna, ar taluvanyes nan tyenna.” 38 Mal hé quente: “Yondonya ua untuva aselde, an hánorya qualina ná, ar isse erinqua lemya. Qui malie martuva sen mí lenda ya lelyuvalde, tá taluvalde şindi findenyar i sapsanna nairenen.”

	35 And it came  that when they emptied their sacks that behold, each man's wrapped-up cloth of money was  in his sack, and when they and their father saw their wrapped-up cloths of money, they were afraid.
	36 And Jacob their father said to them: “From me you have taken my children. Joseph is gone, and Simon is gone, and Benjamin you will take away. Upon me all these things have come.”
	37 And Reuben spoke to his father, saying: “You may kill my two sons, if I do not bringhim back to you. Give him into my hand, and I shall bring him back to you.” 38 But he said: “My son shall not go down with you, for his brother is dead, and he alone remains. If harm will happen to him on the journey that you will go, then you will bring my grey hairs to the grave with grief.”

RANTA 43 
Sí i saicele hranga né i nóresse. 2 Ar túle, íre telyanelte mate i matta ya tallelyanelte Mirrandorello, in atarelta quente téna: “Nanwena, á tala venna pitya lesta mattava.” 3 Mal Yehúra quente senna: “I nér nyarne men tarye quettainen: Ualde cenuva cendelenya laqui hánolda ea aselde! 4 Qui meritye menta hánolma aselme, untuvalme ar ñetuvar tyen matta matien. 5 Mal qui uatye menta se, ualme untuva, an i nér quente menna: Ualde cenuva cendelenya laqui hanolda ea aselde.” 
	6 Ar quente Israel: “Mana castalda carien nin ulco nyariénen i neren in ea len an háno?”  7 Ar quentelte: “I nér maquétane menna pa elme, ar pa nosselma, quétala: Ma atarelda en coita? Ma  ea len an háno? Ar nyarnelme sen ya nanwa ná pa nattor sine. Lau ence men ista i quetumnes: Á tala hánolda undu sir – ?”

CHAPTER 43
Now the famine was hard in the land. 2 And  came , when they finished eathing the food that they had brought from Egypt, that their father said to them: “Return, bring to us a small measure of food.” 3 But Judah said to him: “The man told us with strict words: You will not see my face unless your brother is with you! 4 If you want to sent our brother with us, we will go down and will bring you food to eat. 5 But if you do not send him, we will not go down, for the men said to us: You will not see my face unlesss your brother is with you.”
	6 And Israel said: “What is your reason for doing evil to me by telling the man that you have  another brother?” 7 And they said: “The man was asking us about ourselves, and about our kin, saying: Does your father still live? Do you have another brother? And we told him what is true about these matters. Surely it was not possible for us to know that he was going to say: Bring your brother down here – ?”  

	8 Ar Yehúra quente Israel ataryanna: “Á menta i seldo asinye, ar ortuvalme ar menuvar, ar coituvalme ar uar qualuva, elme ar tyé ar hínalmar véla. 9 Inye nauva sen varnasse. Qui uan tala se tyenna ar panya se epe tye, tá uacárien tyen tennoio. 10 An au ualme lemne, sí naneménielme attea lú.”
	11 Ar Israel atarelta quente téna: “Qui sie ea, tá cara si: Á mapa i arye yávion i nóreo veneldassen, ar cola undu i nerenna anna: pitya lesta oineva, pitya lesta meluva, vihte ar suhte, *şancapecci ar *cuivepecci, 12 ar á mapa atwa i telpe aselde. Yú cola nan i telpe ya náne panyana nan mir pocoldaron anto. Cé ta loima né. 13 Á mapa yú hánolda, ar á orta, mena nan i nerenna. 14 Ar nai Eru Iluvala tyaruva i nér órava lesse, lavieryan hyana hánolda tule oa aselde, ar Venyamin mi imya lé. Ar pa inye – qui pene hín umbartinya ná, pen hín nauvan.”

	8 And Judah said to Israel his father: “Send the boy with me, and we will get up and go, and we will live and not die, we and you and our children alike. 9 I shall be safety for him. If I do not bring him to you and put him before you, then I have sinned against you forever. 10 And if we had not tarried, now we have  returned a second time.”
	11 And Israel their father said to them: “If so it is, then do this: Take of the best fruits of the land in your vessels, and carry down to the man a gift: a small measure of balm , a small measure of honey, gum and resin, pistachio nuts and almonds, 12 and take double the money with you. Also carry back the money that was put back into the mouth of your sacks. Perhaps that was a mistake. 13 Take also your brother, and get up, go back to the man. 14 And may God Almighty cause the man to have mercy on you, for him to allow your other brother to come away with you, and Benjamin in the same manner. And as for me – if to lack children is my fate, without children I shall be.”

	15 Ar i neri namper anna sina, ar atwa i telpe tallelte aselte, ar Venyamin. Tá orontelte ar ununter Mirrandorenna, ar tarnelte opo Yósef. 16 Ar Yósef cenne Venyamin aselte, ar quentes  yenna ortirne coarya: “Á nahta celvar ar áte manwa, an as inye i neri matuvar şinye sinasse.” 17 Ar i nér carne ve Yósef quentelyane, ar i nér tulyane i neri mir coarya Yósef. 18 Ar i neri cenner in anelte tulyaine mir coarya Yósef, ar quentelte: “I telpenen ya nanwenne pocolvannar noave nalve tulyaine sir! Télalte hate inte to venna ar lanta venna ar vi-mapa carien vi móli, as *pellopolvar!” 19 Ar lendelte i nerenna ye ortirne coarya Yósef ar caramper senna i fennasse i coanna. 20 Ar quentelte: “A hér, é ununtelme noave mancien immen matta. 21 Mal íre túlelme i nómenna yasse serumnelme ter i lóme ar pantaner pocolmar, yé, ilya nero telpe enge pocoryo antosse – telpelma mi quanta talme. Ar tallelmes nan aselme. 22 Yú amba telpe atálielme undu aselme, mancien immen matta. Ualme ista man panyane telpelma pocolmassen.” 23 Mal quentes: “Raine len! Áva ruce! Ainolda ar atareldo Aino ánie len harma pocoldassen. Telpelda utúlie ninna.” Tá talles Símon etsenna téna.

	15 And the men took this gift, and double the money they brought with them, and Benjamin. Then they got up and went down to Egypt, and they stood in front of Joseph. 16 Ar Joseph saw Benjamin with them, and he said to  who oversaw his house: “Slaughter animals and prepare them, for with me the men will eat this evening.” 17 And the man did as Joseph had said, and the man led the men into Joseph's house. 18 And the men saw that they were being led into Joseph's house, and they said: “Because of  the money that returned to our sacks formerly are we being led here! They are intending to throw themselves over us and fall upon us and seize us to make us slaves, along with our donkeys!” 19 And they went to the man who oversaw Joseph's hosue and spoke to him in the door to the house. 20 And they said: “O lord, we did indeed come down formerly to trade to ourselves food. 21 But when we cane to the place where we were going to rest for the night and opened our sacks, behold, each man's money was in the mouth of his sack – our money  in full weight. And we brought it back with us. 22 Also more money we have brought down with us, to trade to ourselves food. We do not know who put our money in our sacks.” 23 But he said: “Peace to you! Do not fear! Your God and your father's God has given you a treasure in your sacks. Your money has come to me.” Then he brought Simon outside to them.

	24 Ar i nér tulyane i neri mir coarya Yòsef, ar talles nén, ar sóvelte talultat. Yú talles matso *pellopoltain. 25 Ar manwanelte i anna i entulessen Yósefo i şinyesse, an hlasselyanelte i matumneltes massa tasse.
	26 Ar Yósef túle coaryanna, ar antanelte sen i anna ya tallelyanelte i coanna, ar lantanelte i cemenna epe se. 27 Ar maquentes qui harnelte máriesse, ar quentes: “Ma yára atarelda, pa ye carampelde, hára máriesse? Ma en coitas?” 28 Ar quentelte: “Atarelma, núrolya, hára máriesse. En coitas.” Ar cumbelte ar lantaner undu. 

	24 And the man led the emn into Joseph's house, and he brought water, and they washed their feet. He also brought fodder for their donkeys. 25 And they prepared the gift for the return of Joseph in the evening, for they had heard that they were going to eat bread there. 
	26 And Joseph came to his house, and they gave him the gift that they had brought to the house, and they fell to the earth before him. 27 And he asked if they were all right , and he said: “Is your old father, of whom you spoke, all right? Does he still live?” 28 And they said: “Our father, your servant, is all right. He still lives.” And they bowed and fell down.

	29 Ar ortanes hendyat ar cenne Venyamin hánorya, véra amilleryo yondo. Tá quentes: “Ma si amnessa hánolda ná, pa ye carampelde?” Ar quentes: “Nai Eru antauva lyen lisse, yonya!”
	30 Ar Yósef etelende hormenen, an anes turúna malde felmeryainen hánoryan, ar cestanes nóme yasse ence sen lave nieryain ulya. Ar lendes mir şamberya ar carne nyenyerya tasse. 31 Tá sóves cendelerya ar etelende, ar quentes: “Á tala i matta!” 
	31 Ar panyanette matta opo sé satyave, ar opo té satyave, ar opo i Mirrar i manter óse satyave. An i Mirrar uar lerta mate matta as i Heveryar, an ta yelwa ná i Mirrain.
	33 Ar hámanelte epe se,  *partane yárieltanen i minnónallo i amnessanna, ar yentelte quén i exenna elmendasse. 
	34 Ar masseli náner talaine téna epe sello, mal i masse Venyaminwa náne lúr lempe hoa lá ya ilye i exi ñenter. Tá suncelte ar náner merye óse.

	29 And he lifted up his eyes and saw Benjamin his brother, his own mother's son. Then he said: “Is this your oldest brother, of whom you spoke?” And he said: “May God give you favor, my son!”
	30 And Joseph went out by haste, for he was overpowered by his tender feelings for his brother, and he sought a place where it was possible for him to let his tears flow. And he went into his champer and did his weeping there. 31 Then he washed his face and went out, and he said: “Bring the food!”
	31 And they put food in front of him separately, and before them separately, and before the Egyptians that ate with him separately. For the Egyptians may not eat food with the Hebrews, for that is abominable to the Egyptians. 
	33 And they were sitting before him, arranged by their age from the firstborn to the youngest, and they looked one at the other in wonder.
	34 And portions were being brought to them from before him, but the portion of Benjamin was five times greater than what all the others got. Then they drank and were festive with him.

RANTA 44 
Ar cannes ye ortirne coarya, quétala: “Quata i pocor i neriva mattanen, ilya ya polilte cole, ar á panya ilya nero telpe i antosse pocoryo. 2 Ar á panya yulmanya, i telpina yulma, i antosse i poco i amnessava, as i telpe ya antanes oriryan.” Ar hé carne ve i quetta ya Yósef quentelyane.
	3 Ar íre i arino cala túle, i neri náner mentane oa, té ar *pellopoltar. 4 Mal íre lendelyanelte et i ostollo, ar en úner haire, Yósef quente yenna ortirne coarya: “Á orta, á roita apa i neri, ar íre rahtal téna, queta téna: Manen ná i apaitielde márien ulcunen? 5 Ma si ua ta yallo herunya suce, ar yanen cendas tanwar? Cariénen sie acárielde ulco.”
	6 Ar hé rahtane téna ar quente téna quettar sine. 7 Mal quentelte senna: “Manen ná i herulma quete taiti quettar ve sine? Na haira núroldallon care taite nat! 8 Yé, i telpe ya hirnelme pocolmaron antossen tallelme nan lyenna Canáan·nórello. Tá manen pilumnelme et i coallo herulyava telpe hya malta? 9 I quén as ye nauvas hírina, nai isse qualuva, ar yú elme nauvar móli herunyo.” 10 Ar hé quente: “Yú si, nai euva ve quettaldar. I quén as ye nauvas hírina nauva mólinya, mal elde nauvar pen cáma.” 

CHAPTER 44
And he commanded  who oversaw his house, saying: “Fill the sacks of the men with food, all that they can bar, and put each man's money in the mouth of his sack. 2 And put my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the sack of the youngest, with the money that he gave for his grain.” And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
	3 And when the light of morning came, the men were sent away, they and their donkeys. 4 But when they had gone out from the city, and still were not far away, Joseph said to  who oversaw his house: “Rise up, pursue after the men, and when you reach them, say to them: How is it that you have paid for good with evil? 5 Is this not that from which my lord drinks, and with which he reads signs? By doing this you have done evil.”
	6 And he reached them and said to them these words. 7 But they said to him: “How is it that our lord speaks such words as these? Far be  from your servants to do such a thing! 8 Behold, the silver that we found in the mouths of our sacks we brought back to you from the land of Canaan. Then how were we going to steal out of the house of your lord silver or gold? 9 The person with whom it shall be found, may he die, and we as well will be thralls of my lord.” 10 And he said: “Also this, may  be according to your words. The person with whom it shall be found will be my thrall, but you shall be without guilt.”

	11 Tá lintiénen nampelte ilquen pocorya to i talamenna, ar pantanelte ilquen pocorya. 12 Ar cestanes i poco i amyárava minyave ar telyane i cestie mí poco i amnessava, ar i yulma náne hírina i pocosse Venyaminwa.
	13 Tá narcanelte larmaltar, ar ilya nér panyane natyar nan to *pelloporyanna, ar nanwennelte i ostonna. 

	11 Then with speed they took each one his sack onto the ground, and they opened each one his sack. 12 And he searched the sack of the oldest one firstly and completed the search in the sack of the youngest, and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
	13 Then they tore their garments, and each man put his things back onto his donkey, and they returned to the city. 

	14 Ar Yehúra ar hánoryar túler coaryanna Yósef, ar hé náne ena tasse. Ar lantanelte cemenna epe hé.
	15 Ar Yósef quente téna: “Mana carda sina ya acárielde? Ma ualde sinte i nér ve ní é cenda tanwar?” 16 Ar Yehúra quente: “Mana quetuvalme herulmanna? Manen carpuvalme? Manen ece men tana i nalme pen cáma? Eru ihírie núroldaron ongwe. Yé, nalme herulmo nútinar, elme ar isse as ye i yulma náne hirina.” 17 Mal hé quente: “Na haira nillo care sie! I nér as ye i yulma náne hirina, isse nauva nútinanya, mal elde – á lelya ama rainesse atareldanna.”

	14 And Judah and his brothers came to the house of Joseph, and he was still there. And they fell to the earth before him.
	15 And Joseph said to them: “What is this deed that you have done? Did you not know that a man like me does indeed read signs?” 16 And Judah said: “What are we say to our lord? How are we to speak? How is it possible for us to show that we are without guilt? God has found the crime of your servants. Behold, we are our lord's bound ones, we and he with whom the cup was found.” But he said: “Far be from me to do so! The man with whom the cup was found, he shall be my bound one, but you – go up in peace to your father.”

	18 Tá Yehúra túle hare henna, ar quentes: “Mecin, herunya! Lava núrolyan quete quetta mir herunyo hlaru, ar áva lave rúşelya urya núrolyanna, an elye ve Fáro ná! 19 Herunya maquente núroryannar: Ma ea len atar hya háno? 20 Ar quentelme herunyanna: Ear men atar, yára nér, ar nessa hína nóna sen apa olles yára. Ar hánorya qualina ná, ar isse erinqua lemya amilleryo, ar atarya mele se. 21 Ar quentel núrolyannar: Áse tala undu ninna, cenienyan se hendunyanen. 22 Ar quentelme herunyanna: Lá ece i seldon auta ataryallo, an au autas ataryallo, atarya qualuva. 23 Ar quentel núrolyannar: Qui amnessa hánolda ua unta aselde, ualde cenuva cendelenya ata.
	24 Ar túle in apa lendelme ama núrolyanna, atarinyanna, nyarnelme sen herunyo quettar.  25 Ar atarelma quente: Mena ata, á manca ven pitya lesta mattava. 26 Ar quentelme: Lá ece men unta. Qui amnessa hánolma hilya aselme, tá untuvalme. An ualme lerta cene i nero cendele laqui amnessa hánolma aselme ná. 27 Ar núrolya, atarinya, quente menna: Istalme i verinya colde nin yondo atta, 28 ar er mici tu oante nillo, ar quenten: É anaies narcana. Ar uan ecénie se epeta. 29 Sí, qui mapalde yú si nillo, ar malie hire se, taluvalde şindi findinyar i sapsanna nairenen. 
	
	18 Then Judah came near to him, and he said: “Please, my lord! Let your servant speak a word into my lord's ears, and do not let your wrath burn against your servant, for you are like Pharaoh! 19 My lord asked his servants: Do you have  a father or a brother? 20 And we said to my lord: We have a father, an old man, and a young child born to him after he became old. And his brother is dead, and he alone remain of his mother, and his father loves him. 21 And you said to your servants: Bring him down to me, for me to see him with my eyes. 22 And we said to my lord: It is not possible for the boy to go away from his father, for if he should leave his father, his father will die. 22 And you said to your servants: If your youngest brother does not come down with you, you will not see my face again.
	24 And it came  that after we went up to your servant, to my father, we told him my lord's words. 25 And our father said: Go again, trade to us a small measure of food! 26 And we said: It is not possible for us to go down. If our youngest brother follows with us, then we will go down. For we may not see the man's face unless our youngest brother is not with us. 27 For your servant, my father, said to us: You know that my wife bore to me two sons, 28 and one among them  went away from me, and I said: He has indeed been torn . And I have not seen him thereafter. 29 Now, if you take also this from me, and harm finds him, you will bring my grey hairs to the grave with grief.

	30 Ar sí, qui i seldo ua aselme íre nanwenuvan núrolyanna –  atarinyanna yeo coivie ná nútina i seldo coivienna – 31 ar cenuvas in i seldo vanwa ná, tá qualuvas! Sie núrolyar taluvar i şindi findi núrolyo, atarinyo, i sapsanna nairenen.  32 An inye núrolya olle varnasse i seldon atarinyan, quétala: Qui uan tala se nan tyenna, tá úacárien atarinyan tennoio. 33 Ar sí lava núrolyan lemya sisse i seldo mende, ve nútina nér herunyan, ar lava i seldon lelya ama as hánoryar. 34 An manen lelyuvan ama atarinyanna qui i seldo ua asinye? Lá ece nin tire i ulco ya tulumne atarinyanna!” 

	30 And now, if the boy is not with us when I shall return to your servant – to my father whose life is bound to the boy's life – 31 and he is going to see that the boy is gone, then he will die! Thus your servants will bring the gray hairs of your servant, of my father, to the grave with grief. 32 For I your servant became safety for the boy to my father, saying: If I do not bring him back to you, then I have sinned against my father forever. 33 And now let your servant remain here in the boy's stead, as a bound man to my lord, and let the boy go up with his brothers. 34 And how will I go up to my father if the boy is not with me? It is not possible for me to watch the evil that would come upon my father!”

RANTA 45 
Tá Yósef ua polde ture inse ara illi i tarner epe se, ar yámes: “Tyara ilya nér auta nillo!” Ar ua tarne erya nér óse íre Yósef carnexe sinwa hánoryain. 
	2 Ar ortanes ómarya nyenyesse, ar i Mirrar hlasser, ar nosserya Fáro hlasse. 3 Ar Yósef quente hánoryannar: “Inye Yósef! Ma atarinya en coita?” Mal hánoryain lá ence hanquete senna, an anelte ruhtaine sello. 


CHAPTER 45
Then Joseph was not able to control himself beside all that stood before him, and he cried: “Let  every man to go out from me!” And  did not stand a single man with him when Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
	2 And he raised his voice in weeping, and the Egyptians heard, and Pharaoh's family heard. 3 And Joseph said to his brothers: “I  Joseph! Does my father still live?” But for his brothers it was not possible to answer him, for they were terrified of him.

	4 Ar Yósef quente hánoryannar: “Mecin, tula hare ninna!” Ar túlelte hare. Ar quentes: “Inye Yósef hánolda, ye vancelde mir Mirrandor. 5 Ar sí áva same naire ar áva na rúşie indenna pan vancelde ni sir, an rehtien coivier Eru ni-mentane epe le. 6 An ter loa atta sina i saicele anaie i nóresse, ar euvar an loar lempe pen hyarie ar yávie. 7 Mal Eru ni-mentane opo elde tyarien ranta lemya len cemende, ar hepien le coivie túra uşwenen. 8 Sie elde úner mentane ni sir, mal Eru, ar panyanes ni ve atar Fáron ar heru quanda coaryo, ar tur quanda Mirrandoro. 9 Na linte, mena ama atarinyanna ar queta senna: Sin quete Yósef yondotya: Eru ni-acárie heru quanda Mirrandoro! Á unta ninna, áva lemya! 10 Ar maruvatye Ohyen·nóresse, ar nauvatye hare ninna, tyé ar hínatyar ar hinyatyaron híni, ar lámaretyar ar yaxetyar ar ilqua ya samitye. 11 Ar tasse tulpúvan tye, an ear en loar lempe saiceléva. Sie uatye oluva penya, tyé ar quanda nossetya ar ilqua ya samitye. 12 Ar yé, hendulyat cénat, ar Venyamin hánonyo hendu, in antonya ná ya carpa tyenna. 13 Ar nyaruvalde atarinyan pa quanda alcarinya Mirrandoresse, ar pa ilqua ya ecénielde, ar lintiénen taluvalde atarinya undu sir.” 

	4 And Joseph said to his brothers: “Please, come near to me!” And they came near. And he said: “I  Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. 5 And now do not have grief and do not be angry at yourselves since you sold me hither, for to save lives God sent me before you. 6 For through these two years the famine has been in the land, and  are five more years without plowing and harvest. 7 But God sent me before you to cause a remnant  to remain for you on earth, and to keep you alive by a great escape. 8 Thus you did not send me hither, but God, and he put me as a father to Pharaoh and lord of all his house, and ruler of all Egypt. 9 Be quick, go up to my father and say to him: So says Joseph your son: God has made me lord of all Egypt! Come down to me, do not tarry! 10 And you will dwell in the land of Goshen, and you will me near to me, you and your children and your children's children, and your flocks and your cows and everything that you have. 11 And there I will sustain you, for  are still five years of famine. Thus you will not be poor, you and all your family and everything that you have. 12 For behold, your eyes are seeing, and Benjamin my brother's eyes, that my mouth is what speaks to you. 13 And you will tell my father about all my glory in Egypt, and about everything that you have seen, and with quickness you will bring my father down here.”

	14 Ar lantanes Venyamin hánoryo axenna mi nier, ar Venyamin láve nieryain ulya axeryanna. 15 Ar minques ilye hánoryar, ar láves nieryain ulya téna, ar epeta ilye hánoryar caramper óse.
	16 Ar mo nyarne mi coarya Fáro: “Yósefo hánor utúlier,” ar ta fastane Fáro ar núroryar. 17 Ar Fáro quente Yósefenna: “Queta hánoldannar: Cara si: Á panya i cólo celvaldannar ar á lelya, mena Canáan·nórenna. 18 Ar á tala atarelda ar nosseldar, ar tula ninna, ar inye antauva len ya mára ná Mirrandoro, ar mata i nóreo lar! 19 Ar elyenna i canwa tule, alde care sie: Á mapa noroller Mirrandorello pityaldain ar verildain, ar á tala atarelda ar tula! 20 Ar áva cime natildar, an quanda Mirrandoro armar nar len.”

	14 And he fell upon Benjamin his brother's neck in tears, and Benjamin let his tears flow upon his neck. 15 And he kissed all his brothers, and let his tears flow upon them, and thereafter all his brothers spoke with him.
	16 And one told in Pharaoh's house: “Joseph's brothers have come,” and that pleased Pharaoh and his servants. 17 And Pharaoh said to Joseph: “Say to your brothers: Do this: Put the burden upon your animals and travel, go to the land of Canaan. 18 And bring your father and your families, and come to me, and I shall give you what is good of Egypt, and eat the wealth of the land! 19 And to you  the command comes, you  do likge this: Take chariots from Egypt for your little ones and for your wives, and bring your father and come! 20 And do not give heed to your things, for all the goods of Egypt are for you.”

	21 Ar Yósefo hánor carner sie, ar Yósef antane tien noroller, Fáro canwanen, ar antanes tien matta i lendan. 22 Illin mici te antanes vistier larmaiva, mal Venyamínen antanes telpine hyeceli tuxar nelde, ar vistier lempe larmaiva. 23 Ar ataryanna mentanes mí imya lé *pellopor quean i colder Mirrandoro armar, ar *pellopi quean i colder ore ar massa ar matta ataryan i lendasse. 24 Tá mentanes hánoryar oa, ar íre oantelte, quentes téna: “Áva costa i lendasse!” 

	21 And Joseph's brothers did so, and Joseph gave them chariots, by Pharaoh's order, and he gave them food for the journey. 22 To all among them he gave changes of garments, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred silver shekels, and five changes of garments. 23 And to his father he sent in the same manner ten asses that carried the goods of Egypt, and ten she-asses that carried corn and bread and food for his father on the journey. 24 Then he sent his brothers away, and when they went off, he said to them: “Do not quarrel on the journey!”

	25 Ar lendelte ama et Mirrandorello ar túler mir Canáan·nóre, Yácov atareltanna. 26 Ar nyarnelte sen, quétala: “Yósef en coirea ná, ar nás tur quanda Mirrandoro!” Mal endarya náne ringa, an uas sáve ya quentelte. 27 Ono nyarnelte sen ilye Yósefo quettar yar hé quentelyane téna, ar íre cennes i noroller yar Yósef mentanelyane colien se, Yácov atarelto faire náne envinyanta. 28 Ar Israel quente: “Ta farya! Yósef yondonya en coirea ná! Lelyuvan cenien se nó qualuvan!”

	25 And they went up out of Egypt and came into the land of Canaan, to Jacob their father. 26 And they told him, saying: “Joseph is still alive, and he is ruler of all Egypt!” But his heart was cold, and he did not believe what they said. 27 But they told him all of Joseph's words that he had said to them, and when he saw the chariots that Joseph had sent to carry him, Jacob their father's spirti was renewed. 28 And Israel said: “That suffices! Joseph my son is still alive! I will go to see him before I shall die.”

RANTA 46 
Ar Israel lende, as ilqua ya sámes, ar túles Vëer-Hyevanna ar *yance *yancali Ísac ataryo Ainon. 2 Ar Eru carampe Israelenna mi mauri i lómio, ar quentes: “Yácov, Yácov!” Ar hé quente: “Sisse nanye.” 3 Ar quentes: “Inye Eru, atarelyo Aino. Áva ruce untiello mir Mirrandor, an tasse lye-caruvan túra nóre. 4 Untuvan mir Mirrandor aselye, ar inye yú taluva lye nan ama. Ar Yósef pahtuva hendulyat.”   

CHAPTER 46
And Israel went, with everything that he had, and he came to Beer-Sheba and sacrificed sacrifices to Isaac his father's God. 2 And God spoke to Israel in visions of the night, and he said: “Jacob, Jacob!” And he said: “Here I am.” 3 And he said: “I  God, your father's God. Do not be afraid of going down into Egypt, for there I will make you a great people. 4 I will go down into Egypt with you, and I will also bring you back up. And Joseph will close your eyes.”

	6 Ar nampelte yaxeltar ar armaltar yar ñentelyanelte Canáan·nóresse, ar túlelte mir Mirrandor, Yácov ar quanda indyoryar óse: 7 yondoryar ar yondoraryon yondor óse, selyeryar ar yondoryaron selyer, ar quanda erderya talles óse mir Mirrandor. 
	8 Ar sine nar i essi Israelindion i túler mir Mirrandor, Yácov ar yondoryar: 
	Rëuven náne Yácovo minnóna. 9 Ar yondoryar Rëuven náner Ħanoc ar Pallu ar Ħesron ar Carmi. 10 Ar yondoryar Simeon náner Yemúel ar Yámin ar Óhar ar Yácin ar Sóħar, yú Hyául, yondo nisso Canáanello. 
	11 Ar yondoryar Lévi náner Erhyon, Cohat ar Merári. 12 Ar yondoryar Yehúra náner Ér ar Ónan ar Peres ar Seraħ, mal Ér ar Ónan qualler Canáan·nóresse. Ar yondoryar Peres náner Ħesron ar Ħámul. 

	6 And they took their cows and their goods that they had obtained in the land of Canaan, and they came into Egypt, Jacob and all his descendants with him: 7 his sons and his sons' sons with him, his daughters and his sons' daughters, and all his seed he brought with him into Egypt.
	8 And these are the name of the children of Israel that came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons:
	Reuben was Jacob's firstborn. 9 And Reuben's sons were Hanoch and Pallu and Hezron and Carmi. 9 And the sons of Simeon were Jemuel and Jamin and Ohar and Jachin and Zohar, also Shaul, son of a woman from Canaan.
	11 And the sons of Levi were Gershon, Kohath and Merari. 12 And the sons of Judah were Er and Onan and Perez and Zerah, but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.

	13 Ar yondoryar Issacar náner Tóla ar Puva ar Yóv ar Simron. 14 Ar yondoryar Sevulun náner Serel ar Élon ar Yaħlëel. 15 Sine nar yondoryar Lea, i coldes Yácoven mi Pandan-aram; yú Lína selyerya. Ilye i queni mici yondoryar ar selyeryar náner nelde ar *nelequean.
	16 Ar yondoryar Ár náner Sifion ar Ħangi, Hyúni ar Esvon, Éri ar Aróli ar Aréli. 17 Ar yondoryar Ahyer náner Imna ar Iswa war Iswi ar Vería; enge yú Seraħ néşalta. Ar yondoryar Vería náner Ħever ar Malciel. 18 Sine náner yondoryar Silpa, ye Lávan antane Lea selyeryan, ar sine coldes Yácoven, queni enenque.

	13 And the sons of Issachar were Tola and Puvah and Job and Shimron. 14 And the sons of Zebulun were Sered and Elon and Jahleel. 15 These were the sons of Leah, that she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram; also Dinah his daugher. All the persons among his sons and his daughters were three and thirty.
	16 And the sons of Gad were Ziphion and Haggi, Shuni and Ezbon, Eri and Arodi and Areli. 17 And the sons of Asher were Imnah and Ishvah and Ishvi and Beriah,  was also Serah their sister. And the sons of Beriah were Heber and Malchiel. 18 These were the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bore to Jacob, sixteen persons.

	19 Yondoryar Ráħel, Yácovo veri, náner Yósef ar Venyamin. 20 Ar Yósefen mi Mirrandor náner cóline Manasse ar Efraïm, i Ásenat selyerya Potiféra, i *airimo mi Ón, colde sen. 21 Ar yondoryar Venyamin náner Vela ar Vecer ar Asvel, Éra ar Naaman, Eħi ar Rós, Muppim ar Ħuppim ar Ard.  22 Sine náner Ráħelo yondor i náner cóline Yácoven; illi mici te náner queni canaque.
	23 Yondorya Lán náne Ħúsim. 
	24 Ar yondoryar Naftali náner Yaħsëel ar Úni ar Yéser ar Sillem.

	19 The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife, were Joseph and Benjamin. 20 And to Joseph in Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, that Asenath daughter of Potiphera, the priest in On, bore to him. 21 And the sons of Benjamin were Bela and Becher and Ashbel, Gera and Naaman, Ehi and Rosh, Muppim and Huppim and Ard. 22 These were Rachel's sons that were born to Jacob; all among them were fourteen persons.
	23 The son of Dan was Hushim.
	24 And the sons of Naphtali were Jahzeel and Guni and Jezer and Shillem.

	25 Sine yar yondoryar Vilha, ye Lávan antane Ráħelen; ar sine coldes Yácoven; ilye i queni náner otso.
	26 Ilye i queni Yácovo i túler mir Mirrandor, tulinwe et oşweryallo, ara yondoveriryar Yácov – ilye i queni náner enque ar *enenquean.
	27 Ar Yósefo yondor, i náner cóline sen mi Mirrandor, náner quén atta; ilye i queni nosseo Yácovo i tuler mir Mirrandor náner *otoquean. 
	28 Ar mentanes Yehúra opo inse Yósefenna, tanien sen i tie Óhyenna, ar tulelte Óhyen·nórenna. 

	25 These are the sons of Bilha, whom Laban gave to Rachel, and these she bore to Jacob; all the persons were seven.
	26 All the people of Jacob that came into Egypt, come out of his loins, besides Jacob's son-wives – all the persons were six and sixty.
	27 And Joseph's sons, that were born to him in Egypt, were two persons; all the persons of the kin of Jacob that came into Egypt were seventy.
	28 And he sent Judah before himself to Joseph, to show him the way to Goshen, and they came to the land of Goshen.

	29 Ar Yósef manwane norollerya ar lende ama Óhyenna velien Israel atarya; ar ire cennes hé, lantanes axeryanna ar láve nieryain ulya axeryanna andave. 
	30 Ar Israel quente Yósefenna: “Sí lertan quale, pan ecénien cendeletya, i natye en coirea!”
	31 Ar Yósef quente hánoryannar ar ataryo nossenna: “Menuvan ama ar nyaruvan Fáron, ar quetuvan senna: Hánonyar ar atarinyo nosse, i náner Canáan·nóresse, utúlier ninna. 32 Ar i neri nar mavari celvaron, an ehépielte yaxi, ar atálielte lamáreltar ar yaxeltar ar ilqua ya samilte. 33 Ar martuva, íre Fáro yaluva le ar maquetuva lenna: Mana molielda?, 34 i quetuvalde: Núroldar ehépier celvar nesseltallo ar tenna sí, elme ar atarilmar véla. Sie nauvalde lávine mare Óhyen·nóresse, an ilya mavar yelwa ná i Mirrain.”

	29 And Joseph prepared his chariot and went up to Goshen to meet Israel his father, and when he saw him, he fell upon his neck and let his tears flow upon his neck for a long time. 30 And Israel said to Joseph: “Now I may die, since I have seen your face, that you are still alive!”
	31 And Joseph said to his brothers and to his father's kin: “I will go up and I will tell Pharaoh, and I will say to him: My brothers and my father's family, that were in the land of Canaan, have come to me. 32 Ant the men are shepherds of animals, for they have kept cows, and they have brought their flocks and their cows and everything that they have. 33 And it shall happen, when Pharaoh will call you and ask you: What is your work?, 34 that you will say: Your servants have kept cows from their youth and until now, we and our fathers alike. Thus you will be allowed to dwell in the land of Goshen, for every shepherd is disgusting to the Egyptians.”

RANTA 47 
Tá Yósef lende minna ar nyarne Fáron, ar quentes: “Atarinya ar hánonyar, ar lamáreltar ar yaxeltar ar ilqua ya samilte, utúlier et Canáan·nórello, ar yé, nalte Óhyen·nóresse.”
	2 Ar mici hánoryallon nampes neri lempe, ar talleset opo Fáronna. 3 Ar Fáro quente hánoryannar: “Mana molielda?” Ar quentelte Fáronna: “Núroldar nar mavari, elme ar atarelma véla.” 4 Ar quentelte Fáronna: “Marien i nóresse utúlielme, an lá ea nessele i lamárin núrolyaiva, an i saicele hranga ná Canáan·nóresse.  Ar sí, nai núrolyar lertuvar mare Óhyen·nóresse.” 5 Ar Fáro carampe Yósefenna, quétala: “Atarelya ar hánolyar utúlier ninna. 6 Mirrandor caita ope lye. Mí arya ranta i nóreo lava atarelyan ar hánolyain mare. Ar qui istal neri curuva imica te, áte care turi or yaxenyar.”

CHAPTER 47
Then Joseph went inside and told Pharaoh, and he said: “My father and my brothers, and their flocks and their cows and everything that they have, have come out of the land of Canaan, and behold, they are in the land of Goshen.”
	2 And from among his brothers he took five men, and he brought them to before Pharaoh. 2 And Pharaoh said to his brothers: “What is your work?” And they said to Pharaoh: “Your servants are shepherds, we and our father alike.” 4 And they said to Pharaoh: “To dwell in the land we have come, for  is not pasture for the flocks of your servant, for the famine is hard in the land of Canaan. And now, may your servants be free to dwell in the land of Goshen.” 5 And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying: “Your father and your brothers have come to me. 6 Egypt lies before you  In the best part of the land let your father and your brothers dwell. And if you know men of skill among them, make them rulers over my cows.”

	7 Ar Yósef talle Yácov atarya ar panyane se opo Fáro. Ar Yácov aistane Fáro. 8 Ar Fáro quente Yácovenna: “Mana i nóte i ríon coivielyo?” 9 Ar Yácov quente Fáronna: “I rí i loaron yassen amárien ve aiano nar loar *nelequean ar tuxa. Nótime ar ulce anaier i rí i loaron coivienyo, ar ualte tambe rimbe síve i rí i loaron i coiviéno atarinyaron, íre marnelte ve aianor.” 10 Ar Yácov aistane Fáro ar etelende Fáro cendelello.

	7 And Joseph brought Jacob his father and put him before Pharaoh. And Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 8 And Pharaoh said to Jacob: “What is the number of the days of your life?” 9 And Jacob said to Pharaoh: “The days of the years in which I have dwelt as a stranger are a hundred and thirty years. Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life, and they are not as numerous as the days of the years of the life of my fathers, when they dwelt as strangers.” 10 And Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from the face of Pharaoh.

	11 Ar Yósef láve ataryan ar hánoryain mare tasse ar antane tien véra rantalta mi Mirrandor, i aryasse i nóreo, Raamses·nóresse, Fáro canwanen. 12 Ar Yósef tulpune atarya ar hánoryar ar ataryo quanda nosse massanen, ve i pityaron maure né. 13 Mal lá enge massa i quanda nóresse, an i saicele náne ita hranga, ar Mirrandor and Canáan·nóresse oller milye castanen i saiceleo.

	11 And Joseph let his father and his brothers dwell there and gave them their own part in Egypt, in the best of the land, the land of Raamses, by Pharaoh's command. 12 And Joseph supported his father and his brothers and his father's whole kin with bread, as the need of the little ones was. 13 But there was not bread in the whole land, for the famine was very hard, and Egypt and the land of Canaan became weak by reason of the famine.

	14 Ar Yósef comyane ilya i telpe ya enge mi Mirrandor ar Canáan·nóre, i orin ya i queni mancaner inten sello, ar Yósef talle i telpe mir coarya Fáro. 15 Ar íre i telpe vanwa né mi Mirrandor ar Canáan·nóre, ilye i Mirrar túler Yósefenna ar quenter: “Ámen anta massa, an mana casta ea i qualuvalme opo lye? An telpelma vanwa ná.” 16 Ar Yósef quente: “Á anta celvaldar, ar antauvan len matta celvaldain, qui i telpe vanwa ná.” 17 Ar tallelte celvaltar Yósefenna, ar Yósef antane tien massa quaptalesse i roccoin ar i yaxin ar i lamárin ar i *pellopoin, ar tulpunes te massanen quaptalesse ilye celvaltain ter sana quanda loa.

	14 And Joseph gathered all the money that was in Egypt and the land of Canaan, for the grain that the people traded to themselves from him, and Joseph brought the silver into the house of Pharaoh. 15 And when the money was gone in Egypt and the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph and said: “Give us bread, for what reason exists that we are to die in front of you? For our money is gone.” 16 And Joseph said: “Give  your animals, and I will give you food for your animals, if the money is gone.” 17 And they brought their animals to Joseph, and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for the horses and the cows and the flocks and the donkeys, and he supported them with bread in exchange for all their animals throughout that whole year.

	18 Ar apa loa yana váne, túlelte senna i attea loasse, ar quentelte senna: “Ualme nurtuva herulmallo i nalme luste telpeo, ar in i lamári celvaiva nar herulmava. Ea munta lemyala opo herulma hequa hroalmar ar nórelmar. 19 Manen ná i qualuvalme opo hendulyat, elme ar nórelma véla? Ályen manca mé ar nórelma massan, ar elme ar nórelma nauvar Fáro núror. Ar ámen anta erde, lavila men coita ar lá quale, ar pustala i nóre oliello falin.

	18 And after that year passed, they came to him in the second year, and they said to him: “We will not hide from our lord that we are empty of money, and that the flocks of animals are our lord's.  is nothing remaining before our lord except our bodies and our lands. 19 How is  that we are going to die before your eyes, we and our land alike? Trade to yourself us and our land for bread, and we and our land shall be Pharaoh's servants. And give us seed, letting us live and not die, and stopping the land from becoming fallow.”

	20 Sie Yósef mancane Fáron i quanda palúre Mirrandoro, an i Mirrar vancer ilya quén restarya, an i saicele lumnane tien, ar i nóre olle Fárova. 21 Ar i lie talles mir ostor, er mettallo i réno Mirrandoro i hyana rénanna. 22 Rie i nóre i *airimoiva uas mancane insen, an i *airimor náner tulpuine lo Fáro ar manter i masse ya Fáro antane tien. Etta ualte vance restaltar.

	20 Thus Joseph traded to Pharaoh the entire surface of Egypt, for the Egyptians sold each person his field, for the famine was heavy upon them, and the land became Pharaoh's. 21 And the people he brought into cities, from one end of the border of Egypt to the other border. 22 Only the land of the priests he did not trade to himself, for the priests were being supported by Pharaoh and ate the portion that Pharaoh gave them. Therefore they did not sell their fields.

	23 Tá Yósef quente i lienna: “Yé, síra amancien le ar restaldar Fáron. Ela, sisse ea erde len, ar rera i restar! 24 Ar martuva i yáviesse in antauvalde lepesta Fáron, mal massi canta nauvar elden, ve erde i restan, ar ve matta len ar in nar coaldassen, ar ve matta pityaldain.” 25 Ar quentelte: “Erehtiel coivielma! Nai hiruvalme lisse mi herulmo hendu, ar nauvalme Fáro núror.”
	26 Ar Yósef carne namna pa Mirrandor ya tare tenna aure sina, i Fáro samumne i lepesta. Rie i restar i *airimoiva uar olle Fárova.
	27 Ar Israel marne Mirrandoresse, Óhyen·nóresse, ar ñentelte rantali tasse, ar anelte yavila ar oller ita rimbe. 28 Ar Israel marne Mirrandoresse loassen otoque. Sie Yácovo rí, coivieryo loar, náner loar otso ar *canaquean ar tuxa.

	23 Then Joseph said to the people: “Behold, today I have traded you and your fields to Pharaoh. Behold, here is seed for you, and sow the fields. 24 And it will happen in the harvest that you will give a fifth to Pharaoh, but four parts shall be for you, as seed for the field, and as food for you and for  that are in your houses, and as food for your little ones.” 25 And they said: “You have saved our life! May we find grace in our lord's eyes, and we shall be Pharaoh's servants.”
	26 And Joseph made an edict about Egypt that stands until this day, that Pharaoh was to have the fifth part. Only the fields of the priests did not become Pharaoh's. 
	27 And Israel dwelt in Egypt, in the land of Goshen, and they received parts there, and they were fruitful and became very numerous. 28 And Israel dwelt in Egypt for  seventeen years. Thus Jacob's days, the years of his life, were a hundred and forty-seven years. 

	29 Ar íre i lú qualmeo Israélo túle hare, tultanes Yósef yondorya ar quente henna: “Qui sí ihírien lisse mi hendutyat, mecin, á panya mátyat nu tiuconya ar ánin lenga mi oravie ar voronwe: Mecin, ávani panya sapsasse Mirrandoresse. 30 Mal íre nanye lorna as atarinyar, áni tala ama et Mirrandorello ar áni panya sapsanómeltasse.” Ar hé quente: “Caruvan ve equétietye.” 31 Ar quentes: “Ánin anta vandatya.” Ar hé antane sen vandarya. Ar Israel cumbe undu i caimo carenna.

	29 And when the time of Israel's death came near, he summoned Joseph his son and said to him: “If now I have found favor in your eyes, please, put your hands under my thigh and behave towards me with mercy and faithfulness: Please, do not put me in a grave in Egytp. 30 But when I am asleep with my fathers, bring me up out of Egypt and put me in their grave-place.” And he said: “I will do as you have said.” And he said: “Give me your oath.” And he gave him his oath. And Israel bent down upon the head of the bed.

RANTA 48 
Ar martane epeta i mo quente Yósefenna: “Yé, atarelya hlaiwa ná.” Ar talles yondorya atta, Manasse ar Efraïm.
	2 Ar mo nyarne Yácoven ar quente: “Ela, Yósef yondolya túla lyenna!” Ar Israel toryanexe ar hamne i caimanna. 3 Ar Yácov quente Yósefenna: “Eru Iluvala tannexe mi Lús mi Canáan·nóre, ar aistanes ni 4 ar quente ninna: “Yé, caruvan lye yavila ar rimba, ar caruvan lyello combe lielíva, ar antauvan nóre sina erdelyan apa lye, harieltan sa tennoio. 5 Ar sí, yondotya atta, nóne tyen Mirrandoresse nó túlen tyenna mir Mirrandor, nát ninye. Efräim yo Manasse, ve Rëuven ar Símeon, nauvat ninye. 6 Ar hinatyar i nostuvatye apa tú nauvar tyen; nauvalte nótine nu hánotyaron essi pa i nóre ya haryuvalte. 7 Ar pa ní, íre túlen Pandanello, Ráħel qualle nillo Canáan·nóresse, íre en enge tie menien Efaretenna; ar antanen sen sapsa tasse i tiesse ana Efrat – ta ná, Vet-Lehem.”

CHAPTER 48
And it happened thereafter that one said to Joseph: “Behold, your father is sick.” And he brought his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
	2 And one told Jacob and said: “Behold, Joseph your son is coming to you!” And Israel strengthened himself and sat upon the bed. 3 And Jacob said to Joseph: “God Almighty showed himself in Luz in the land of Canaan, and he blessed me 4 and said to me: “Behold, I will make you fruitful and numerous, and I will make from you a group of peoples, and I will give this land to your seed after you, for them to possess it forever. 5 And now, your two sons, born to you in Egypt before I came to you in Egypt, are mine. Ephraim and Manasseh, like Reuben and Simeon, will be mine. 6 And your children that you will beget after them shall be for you; they will be counted under your brothers' names concerning the land that they will possess. 7 And concerning me, Rachel died from me in the land of Canaan, when  was still a way to go to Ephrath, and I gave her a grave there on the road towards Ephrath – that is, Bethlehem.”

8 Ar Israel cenne Yósefo yondor, ar quentes: “Manar nar sine?” 9 Ar Yósef quente ataryanna: “Natte yondonyar, i Eru ánie nin sisse.” Ar hé quente: “Á tala tu, mecin, ninna, ar aistuvanyet.”
	10 Sí Israélo hendu nánet néce, pan anes yára, ar lá ence sen cene. Ar Yósef talle tu hare henna, ar hé minque tu ar panyane rancuryat *os tu. 11 Ar Israel quente Yósefenna: “Uan sáve in encenuvan cendeletya, mal yé, Eru alávie nin cene yú erdetya.” 12 Ar Yósef ettalle tu ho imbe occaryat, ar lantanes undu, cendelerya i talamenna.

	8 And Israel saw Joseph's sons, and he said: “Who are these?” 9 And Joseph said to his father: “They are my sons, that God has given me here.” And he said: “Bring them, please, to me, and I will bless them.” 
	10 Now Israel's eyes were dim, since he was old, and it was not possible for him to see. And Joseph brought them hear to him, and he kissed them and put his arms around them. 11 And Israel said to Joseph: “I did not believe that I would  see your face again, but behold, God has allowed me to see also your seed.” 12 And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he fell down, his face towards the ground.

	13 Ar Yósef nampe tu yúyo, Efraïm foryaryanen Israélo hyarmanna, ar Manasse hyarmarnen Israélo formanna, ar talleset hare henna. 14 Ar Israel rahtane formaryanen ar panyane sa to Efraímo cas, ómu hé i amnessa né, ar hyarmarya to Manasseo cas, panyala rancuryat tarwesse, an Manasse i minnóna né. 15 Ar aistanes Yósef ar quente: “I Aino epe ye atarinyar, Avraham ar Isac, vantaner, i Aino ye anaie mavarinya ter quanda coivienya tenna ré sina, 16 i vala ye etelehtane ni ilya ulcullo – nai aistuvas i seldor, ar nai essenya nauva estaina mi tú, ar i esse atarinyaron, Avraham ar Ísac! Nai aluvatte mir rimbe cemende!”

	13 And Joseph took them both, Ephraim by his right hand towards Israel's left hand, and Manasseh by his left hand towards Israel's right hand, and he brought them near to him. 14 And Israel reached out with his right hand and put it on Ephraim's head, though he was the youngest, and his left hand on Manasseh's head, placing his arms in a cross, for Manasseh was the firstborn. 15 And he blessed Joseph and said: “The God before whom my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, walked, the God who has been my shepherd through my whole life until this day, 16 the angel that delivered me from all evil – may he bless the boys, and may my name be named in them, and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac. May they grown into a multitude on earth!”

	17 Mal íre Yósef cenne in atarya panyane formarya Efraímo caresse, ta raica né henduryatse, ar nampes ataryo má, mapien sa oa Efraímo carello Manasseo carenna. 18 Ar Yósef quente ataryanna: “Lá sie, atarinya, an si i minnóna ná. Á panya formatya to carya.” 19 Mal atarya váquente ar quente: “Istan, yonya, istan! Yú isse oluva lie, ar yú isse nauva túra. Ananta amnessa hánórya nauva túra lá sé, ar erderya oluva rimbe lielíva.”
	20 Ar aistanes tu mi sana ré, quétala: “Tyénen Israel aistuva, quétala: Nai Eru caruva lye ve Efraïm ar ve Manasse!” Ar panyanes Efraim epe Manasse.
	21 Ar Israel quente Yósefenna: “Yé, inye quála, mal Eru euva aselde, ar taluvas le nan i nórenna atareldaron. 22 Ar inye ánie tyen er quíne han ya antan hánotyain, ya nampen i Amoryallon macilinyanen ar quinganyanen.”
	
	17 But when Joseph saw that his father put his right hand on Ephraim's head, that was wrong in his eyes, and he took his father's hand, to take it away from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head. 18 And Joseph said to his father: “Not so, my father, for this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.” 19 But his father refused and said: “I know, my son, I know! He too will become a people, and he too will become great. And yet his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed will become a multitude of peoples.”
	20 And he blessed them  on that day, saying: “By you  Israel will bless, saying: May God make you like Ephraim and like Manasseh!” And he put Ephraim before Manasseh.
	21 And Israel said to Joseph: “Behold, I am dying, but God will be with you, and he will bring you back to the land of your fathers. 22 And I have given you one ridge beyond what I give to your brothers, which I took from the Amorites by my sword and with my bow.”


RANTA 49
 Ar Yácov yalde yondoryar ar quente: “Ócoma, ar nyaruvan mana martuva len mí rí yar tuluvar. 2 Á  comya inde, ar hlara, Yácovo yondor, ar á lasta Israel atareldanna!
	3 Rëuven, minnónyanya natye, melehtenya ar i yesta vienyo, arwa arya áyo ar arya túreo. 4 Útanca ve neni, ávatye same arya! An íre lendetye ama mir i caima ataretyava, carnetyes upoica. Lendes ama mir sa!
	5 Símeon ar Lévi nar hánor; carmar ormeva nar langottar. 	6 Áva tule mir nulde omentiettar, feanya! Áva na comyana ocombettanna, alcarinya! An rúşsettanen nacantette neri, ar írettanen cirnelte mondoron tuor. 7 Na húna rúşetta, an anes naraca, ar ahatta, an anes nwalca! Hyaruvanyet mi Yácov ar vintuvanyet mi Israel.

CHAPTER 49
And Jacob called his sons and said: “Assemble, and I will tell you what will happen to you in days that shall come. 2 Gather yourselves, and hear, Jacob's sons, and listen to Israel your father.
	3 Reuben, my firstborn you are, my might and the beginning of my vigour, having more of awe and more of power. 4 Unstable like water, do not you have more! For when you went up into your father's bed, you made it unclean. He went up into it!
	5 Simeon and Levi are brothers; weapons of violence are their swords. 6 Do not come into their secret meetings, my soul! Do not be gathered to their congregation, my glory! For by their wrath they slew men, and by their desire they cut the sinews of oxen. 7 Cursed be their wrath, for it was harsh, and their anger, for it was cruel! I will split them in Jacob and I will scatter them in Israel.

	8 Yehúra, tyé hánotyar laituvar; mátya nauva to i axe ñottotyaron. Ataretyo yondor cuvuar undu epe tye. 9 Yehúra ná rávo hína; i nahtanallo, yonya, eménietye ama. Caines undu, séres ve rá – ar ve ravenne, man verya eccoita se? 
	10 I *turvandil ua autuva Yehúrallo hya i heruo vanga imbe talyalto, nó ye samuva sa tuluva, ar canwaryar i lier cimuvar. 11 Nutis *perroccorya i liantassenna, ar *pelloperyo hína i mirwa liantassenna. Sovis limpesse larmaltar, ar *tiumaron sercesse lanneltar. 12 Henyat nauvat carni limpenen, ar nelciryar nauvar ninqui ilimnen.

	8 Judah, you your brothers will praise; your hand shall be on the neck of your enemies. Your father's sons shall bow down before you. 9 Judah is the offspring of a lion; from the slain one, my son, you have gone up. He laid down, he rested like a lion – and like a lioness, who dares to wake him up?
	10 The sceptre shall not pass from Judah or the lord's staff from between his feet, before  who shall have it will come, and his commands the peoples shall heed. 11 He ties his ass to the vine, and the young of his she-donkey to the precious vine. He washes in wine his garments, and in the blood of grapes his clothes. 12 His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth shall be white with milk. 

	13 Sevulun –  ara earo falasse maruvas, ar isse nauva hópa ciryain, mal anhaira rantarya nauva ana Síron.
	14 Issacar ná *pellopo arwa hoe axoron, caitala undu imbe cólo atta. 15 An cennes in i sérenóme mára ná, ar in i nóre tenwa ná, ar lahtanes almorya ar olle mól nu mausta.
	16 Lán namuva lierya, ve er i nossion Israélo. 17 Nai Lán nauva leuca i mallesse, ango i tiesse, ye nace i roccoron *taltelli, tyarila i roquen lanta nan.
	18 Hopin rehtien lyello, a Héru!
	19 Ár – arpohosse maptuva se, mal isse maptuva tellelta.
	20 Pa Áhyer, massarya nauva úvea, ar talas matta valda aranen.

	13 Zebulun – by the strand of the sea he shall dwell, and he shall be a haven for ships, but his remotest part shall be towards Zidon.
	14 Issachar is a donkey having great bones, lying down between two burdens. 15 And he saw that the resting-place was  good, and that the land was  attractive, and he bowed his shoulder and became a thrall under compulsion.
	16 Dan shall judge his people, like one of the tribes of Israel. 17 May Dan be a serpent on the road, a snake on the path, who bites the heels of the horses, causing the rider to fall back.
	18 I wait for salvation from you, o Lórd! 
	19 Gad – a troop of thieves will ravish him, but he shall ravish their rear.
	20 As for Asher, his bread will be abundant, and he brings food worthy of  a king.

	21 Naftali ninde *arasso ná. Quetis vanimelde quettar.
	22 Yósef yavila liantasse ná, yavila liantasse ara ehtele, yeo olwar rahtar olla i ramba. 23 Mal i neri arwe quingaron tyarner sen sára naire; lantanelte senna pilindiltainen ar náner cotye sen. 24 Ananta quingarya en tanca ná, ar máryato rancu anaiet cárine tyelce lo mát i Tauro Yácovo, lo i Mavar, Israélo Sar 25 – lo ataretyo Aino, ye tye-manyuva aistielínen tarmenelo, aistiéli i undumeo ya caita nún, aistiéli i tyetsion ar i móno. 26 Ataretyo aistier lahtar i aistier i enwine orontion, é i mánar i oire amboron. Nauvalte to Yósefo cas, ar to i inga i caro i condo imíca hánoryar.
	27 Venyamin narca ve ráco; mí arin ammatis i nanca, ar mí şinye hyaris i rauna. 

	21 Naphtali is a slender deer. He speaks beautiful words.
	22 Joseph is a fruitful vine, a fruitful vine by a spring, whose branches reach over the wall. 23 But the men having bows caused him bitter grief; they fell upon him with their arrows and were hostile to him. 24 And yet his bow is still firm, and the arms of his hands have been made agile by  hands of the Mighty One of Jacob, by the Shepherd, Israel's Stone 25 – by your father's God, who will help you with blessings of high heaven, blessings of the abyss that lies beneath, blessings of the teats and of the womb. 26 Your father's blessings surpass the blessings of the ancient mountains, indeed the boons of the eternal hills. They shall be on Joseph's head, and on the top of the head of the prince among his brothers.
	27 Benjamin tears like a wolf; in the morning he devours the  slain, and in evening he divides the spoil. 

28 Ilye sine nar Israélo nossi yunque, ar si ná ya atarelta quente téna íre aistanéset; ilquenen antanes véra aistierya. 29 Ar cannes te ar quente téna: “Nanye comyaina lienyanna. Ánin anta noire as atarinyar i rottosse ya ea Efron i Ħetyo restasse, 30 mí rotto ya ea mí Macpela-restasse, ya Avraham mancane insen as Efron i Ħetyo resta náven sapsanóme ya haryumnes. 31 Tasse antanelte sapsa Avrahámen ar Sara veryiryan; tasse panyanelte Ísac ar Revecca verirya, ar tasse antanen Lean sapsarya.  32 I resta ar i rotto ya ea sasse náner mancane i Ħetyallon.”
	33 Sie Yácov telyane cane yondoryain, ar tunces talyat mir i caima ar effirne ar náne comyana lieryanna.

	28 All these are Israel's twelve tribes, and this is what their father said to them when he blessed them; to each one he gave his own blessing. 29 And he commanded them and said to them: “I am being gathered to my people. Give me a tomb with my fathers in the cave that is at Ephron the Hittite's field, 30 in the cave that is in the Machpelah field, which Abraham traded to himself with Ephron the Hittite's field to be a burial place that he would possess. 31 There they gave a grave to Abraham and to Sarah his wife; there they put Isaac and Rebecca his wife, and there I gave Leah her grave. 32 The field and the cave that is in it were traded from the Hittites.”
	33 Thus Jacob completed charging his sons, and he pulled his feet into the bed and expired and was gathered to his people.

RANTA 50 
Ar Yósef lantane ataryo cendelenna, ar nieryar uller henna, ar minques hé. 3 Ar Yósef canne núroryain, i aşaror, *voronta atarya. Sie i aşaror *vorontaner Israel, 3 ar rí *canaquean váner lan vorontaneltes, an ta ná i lúme ya auta íre mo *voronta loico. Ar i Mirrar nainaner se ter rí *otoquean.
	4 Ar íre i rí nainiéva se náner vanwe, Yósef carampe Fáro nossenna ar quente: “Qui sí ihírien lisse henduldatse, á carpa, mecin, Fáro hlarunna, quétala: 5 Atarinya tyarne ni anta vandanya, quétala: Inye quála; sapsanyasse ya asápien nin Canáan·nóresse, tasse áni panya. Etta lava nin lelya ama, ar panyuvan atarinya sapsaryasse. Tá nanwenuvan.” 6 Ar Fáro quente: “Á lelya ama, ar á tala atarelya sapsaryanna, i vandanen ya tyarnes lye anta.”

CHAPTER 50
And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and his tears poured upon him, and he kissed him. 3 And Joseph commanded his servants, the doctors, to embalm his father. Thus the doctors embalmed Israel, 3 and forty days passed while embalmed him, for that is the time which passes when one embalms a corpse. And the Egyptians lamented him for seventy days.
	4 And when the days of lamenting him were gone, Joseph spoke to Pharaoh's family and said: “If now I have found favor in your eyes, talk, please, to Pharaoh's ear, saying; 5 My father caused me to give my oath, saying: I am dying; in my grave that I have dug for me in the land of Canaan, there put me. Therefore let me go up, and I will place my father in his grave. Then I will return.” 6 And Pharaoh said: “Go up, and bring your father to his grave, by the oath that he let you give.”

	7 Ar Yósef lende ama talien atarya sapsaryanna, ar óse lender ilye Fáro núror, coaryo amyárar, ar ilye i amyárar Mirrandoresse, 8 ar i quanda nosse Yósefo, ar hánoryar, ar ataryo nosse. Rie pityaltar ar lamáreltar ar yaxeltar hehtanelte Óhyen·nóresse. 9 Ar lendende ama óse, noroller ar roqueni véla, ar i combe ita hoa né. 10 Ar túlelte ana Oren-Haátar ya caita Yordan pella, ar tasse nainanelte nainiénen ita tumna ar túra, ar carnes naire ataryan ter rí otso. 11 Ar íre i marner i nóresse, i Canáanyar, cenner i naire mi Oren-Haátar, quentelte: “Si túra naire ná i Mirrain!”  Etta mo estane i nóme Ável-Misráim (Naire i Mirraron). Caitas Yordan pella.

	7 And Joseph went up to bring his father to his grave, and with him went all servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the enders in Egypt, 9 and the whole kin of Joseph, and his brotehrs, and his father's kin. Only their little ones and their flocks and their cows they left in the land of Goshen. 9 And they went up with him, chariots and knights alike, and the assembly was very great. 10 And they came to Goren-Ha'atad which lies beyond the Jordan, and there they lamented with a lament extremely profound and great, and he make sorrow for his father for seven days. 11 And when  who dwelt in the land, the Canaanites, saw the sorrow in Goren-Ha'atad, they said: “This is a great sorrow for the Egyptians!” Therefore one called the place Abel-Mizraim (Sorrow of the Egyptians). It lies beyond the Jordan.

	12 Ar yondoryar carner sen ve cannelyanes tien. 13 Sie yondoryar colder se Canáan·nórenna, ar antaner sen sapsa i rottosse i Macpela-restasse – i rotto ya Avraham mancane insen as i resta, ve sapsanóme ya haryumnes, ho Efron i Ħetya, opo Mamre. 14 Tá Yósef nanwenne mir Mirrandor, isse ar hánoryar, ar illi i lendelyaner ama óse talien atarya i sapsanna, apa panyanelyanelte hé i noirisse. 
	15 Ar íre Yósefo hanor cenner in atarelta aquálie, quentelte: “Cé Yósef tevuva vi, ar paityuvas vi i ulcun ya carnelve sen.” 16 Ar mentanelte quetta Yósefenna, quétala: “Ataretya canne nó qualles: 17 Sie alde quete Yósefenna: “Mecin, apsena hánotyaron ongwe ar úcarelta, íre carnelte ulco tyen. Ar sí, mecilme, apsena ataretyo Aino núroin ongwelta!” Ar Yósefo nier uller lan quétanelte senna.

	12 And his sons did to him as he had commanded them. 13 Thus his sons carried him to the land of Canaan, and gave him a grave in the cave that is in the Machpelah field – the cave which Abraham traded to himself with the field, as a burial place he would possess, from Ephron the Hittite, in front of Mamre. 14 Then Joseph returned into Egypt, he and his brothers, and all that had gone up with him to bring his father to the grave, after they had put him in the tomb.
	15 And when Joseph's brother's saw that their father had  died, they said: “Maybe Joseph will hate us, and he will take revenge on us for the evil that we did to him.” 16 And they sent word to Joseph, saying: “Your father commanded before he died: 17 Thus you are to speak to Joseph: “Please, forgive your brother's crime and their sin, when they did evil to you. And now, we pray, forgive your father's God's servants their crime!” And Joseph's tears flowed while they were speaking to him.

	18 Ar hánoryar yú lender ar lantaner undu epe cendelerya, ar quentelte: “Yé, nalme núrotyar!” 19 Mal Yósef quente téna: “Áva ruce, an ma inye Eruo mende ná? 20 Elde carner panor pa ulco ninna, mal Eru carne panor pa márie, tyarien marta ya sí utúlie, rehtien rimbe ennolion coivie. 21 Ar sí, áva ruce! Inye tulpúva le ar pityaldar!” Ar tiutanes te ar carampe téna mi nilda lé.
	22 Ar Yósef marne Mirrandoresse, isse ar ataryo nosse, ar Yósef coine ter loar quean ar tuxa. 23 Ar Yósef cenne Efraímo híni i neldea *nónareo. Yú Mácir, Manasseo yondo, náne nóna Yósefo occatse. 
	24 Ar Yósef quente hánoryannar: “Inye quála, mal Eru é cimuva le, ar taluvas le ama et nóre sinallo i nórenna pa ya antanes vandarya Avrahámen, Ísacen ar Yácoven” 25 Ar Yósef tyarne Israelindi anta vandalta, quétala: “Eru é cimuva le, ar coluvalde axonyar silo.”
	26 Tá Yósef qualle, arwa loaron quean ar tuxa. Ar *vorontaneltes, ar anes panyana mir colca Mirrandoresse.

	18 And his brothers also went and fell down before his face, and they said: “Behold, we are your servants!” 19 But Joseph said to them: “Do not be afraid, for am I in God's stead? 20 You made plans about evil against me, but God made plans about good, to cause to happen what has now come , to save the life of numerous people. 21 And now, do not fear! I will support you and your little ones!” And he comforted them and spoke to them in a friendly manner.
	22 And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his father's family, and Joseph lived for a hundred and ten years. 23 And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation. Also Machin, Manasseh's son, was born on Joseph's knees.
	24 And Joseph said to his brothers: “I am dying, but God shall indeed give heed to you, and he will bring you up out of this land to the land of which he gave his oath to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob.” 25 And Joseph made the children of Israel give their oath, saying: “God will indeed give heed to you, and you will carry my bones hence.”
	26 Then Joseph died, having  a hundred and ten years. And they embalmed him, and he was put into a coffin  in Egypt. 
