
ĦANGAI    
Haggai

RANTA 1
Lárius i Arano attea loasse, i minya auresse i enquea astasse, i Héruo quetta túle ter Ħangai i Erutercáno Seruvávelenna yondorya Hyealtiel, nórecáno Yehúro, ar Yohyuanna yondorya Yehosarac, i héra *airimo, quétala: “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Lie sina quete in i lúme en ua utúlie encarastien i Héruo coa.” 3 Mal i Héruo quetta túle ter Ħangai i Erutercáno: “Ma lúmelda utúlie marien coassen tópine panoinen, lan i corda atalantea ná? 5 Ar sí, sin quete i Héru Hossion: Cima mana marta len! 6 Réralde hoa lesta, mal yávielda pitya ná. Mo máta, mal sa ua farya. Mo súca, mal ua ole quanta. Mo tópaxe larmainen, mal ua ole lauca. Ar i paityana quén came telperya mi *pocolle quanta assaron!”

CHAPTER 1
In the second year of Darius the King, on the first day in the sixth month, the Lord's word came through Haggai the Prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Jehoshua the son of Jehozadac, the chief priest, saying: “Thus says the Lord of Hosts: This people says that the time still has not come for rebuilding the Lord's house.” 3 But the Lord's word came through Haggai the Prophet: “Has your time come for dwelling in houses covered in planks, while the temple is ruinous? 5 And now, so says the Lord of Hosts: Take heed of what happens to you! 6 You are sowing a great measure, but your harvest is small. One is eating, but it does not suffice. One is drinking, but does not become full. One is covering oneself in raiments, but does not become warm. And the paid person receives his money in a pouch full of holes!”

	7 Sin quete i Héru Hossion: “Cima mana marta len! 8 Mena ama mir i oron ar tala undu toa, ar alde encarasta i Coa. Ar nauvan fastaina sanen, ar samuvan alcar,” quete i Héru. 
	9 “Hopilde hoa lestan, mal hirir pitya. Talalde yávielda mir coalda, mal vávanyes oa. Mana castanen?” quete i Héru Hossion. “Castanen coanyo, ya atalantea ná, lan ilquen mici elde nore véra coaryanna! 10 Etta menel ua anta len rosserya, ar cemen ua anta yávierya. 11 Aiálien parcie cemenna ar orontinnar, orinna ar limpenna ar millonna, ilquanna ya tule ama i talamello, atanna ar celvanna, ar ilya molienna carna lo mát.”
	12 Tá hlasselte i Héru Ainolto ómanna, Seruvável yondorya Hyealtiel ar Yohyua yondorya Yehosarac i héra *airimo ar illi i lemner i lieo. Cimnelte Ħangai i Erutercáno quettar, pan anes mentana lo i Héru Ainolta. Ar i lie runce i Hérullo.
	13 Ar mentana lo i Héru, Ħangai i Héruo tercáno quente i lienna: “Inye aselde, ná i Héruo quetie.”
	14 I Héru valtane i faire mi Seruvável yondorya Hyealtiel nórecáno Yehúro, mi Yohyua yondorya Yehosarac i héra *airimo, ar mi illi i lemner i lieo. Tá túlelte ar carner molie Coasse i Héruva Hossion, Ainolta. 15 Si martane Lárius i Arano attea loasse, i canta *yúqueanya auresse i enquea astasse.  

	7 So says the Lord of Hosts: “Take heed of what happens to you! 8 Go up into the mountain and bring down wood, and rebuild the House. And I shall be pleased by it, and I shall have glory,” says the Lord.
	9 “You wait for a great measure, but find little. You bring your harvest into your house, but I blow it away. For  what reason?” says the Lord of Hosts. “By reason of my house, which is ruinous, while everyone among you runs to his own house! 10 Therefore heaven does not give you its dew, and earth does not give its harvest. 11 I have summoned drought upon earth and mountains, upon grain and upon wine and upon oil, upon everything that comes up from the ground, upon man and upon beast, and upon every work done by hands.”
	12 Then they listened to the voice of the Lord their God, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Joshua son of Jehosadak the chief priest and all that remained of the people. They heeded the words of Haggai the Prophet, since he was sent by the Lord their God. And the people feared the Lord. 
	13 And sent by the Lord, Haggai the Lord's herald said to the people: “I  with you,is the Lord's saying.”
	14 The Lord stirred the spirit within Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel the governor of Judah, in Joshua the son of Jehozadak the chief priest, and in all that remained of the people. Then they came and did work on the House of the Lord of Hosts, their God. 15 This happened in the second year of Darius the King, on the four  twentieh day in the sixth month.

RANTA 2
I otsea astasse, mí er *yuqueanya aure, i Héruo quetta túle ter Ħangai i Erutercáno, quétala: 2 “Queta Seruvávelenna yondorya Hyealtiel nórecáno Yehúro, ar Yohyuanna yondorya Yehosarac i héra *airimo, ar innar lemyar i lieo: 3 Mici elde i lemyar, man cenner Coa sina minya alcareryasse, ar manen cénaldes sí? Ma uas henduldatse ve munta? 4 Mal si ná i Héruo quetie: Sí na polda, a Seruvável! Yú na polda, a Yohyua yondorya Yehosarac, i héra *airimo! Ar na polda, i quanda lie i nóresse! ná i Héruo quetie. Alde mole, an inye aselde, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. 5 Enyala i vére ya tulcanen aselde íre lendelde et Mirrandorello, íre fairenya tarne endeldasse. Áva ruce!” 
	6 An sin quete i Héru Hossion: “Apa an şinta lúme – rie titta lú – paluvan menel ar cemen ar ear ar parca nór. 7 Ar paluvan ilye i nóri, ar i írime nati ilye nórion tuluvar, ar quatuvan Coa sina alcarnen,” quete i Héru Hossion.

CHAPTER 2
In the seventh month, on the one  twentieth day, the Lord's word came through Haggai the Prophet, saying: 2 Say to Zerubbabbel the son of Shealtiel governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Jehosadak the chief priest, and to  that remain of the people: 3 Among you that remain, who saw this House in its first glory, and how are you seeing it now? Is it not in your eyes like nothing? 4 But this is the saying of the Lord: Now be strong, o Zerubbabel! Also be strong, o Joshua son of Jehosadak, the chief prist! And be strong, the entire people in the land! is the saying of the Lord. You  work, for I  with you, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. 5 Remember the covenant that I established with you when you went out of Egypt, when my spirit stood in your midst. Do not fear!”
	6 For thus says the Lord of Hosts: “After a short time more – just a tiny moment – I shall shake heaven and earth and sea and dry land. 7 And I shall shake all the nations, and the desirable things of all nations shall come, and I will fill this House with glory,” says the Lord of Hosts.

	8 “Ninya i telpe ná, ar ninya i malta,” ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. 9 “Attea coa sina samuva alcar túra lá i minyo alcar,” quete i Héru Hossion. 10 “Ar nóme sinasse antauvan raine,” ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion.
	11 I nertea astasse, mí canta *yuqueanya aure, mí attea loarya Lárius, i Héruo quetta túle ter Ħangai i Erutercáno, quétala: “Sin quete i Héru Hossion: Sí maqueta i *airimonnar pa i şanye, sie: 12 Qui quén cóla aire hráve mi vaitana collarya, ar i collo vaitie ape massa hya apsa hya limpe hya millo hya hyana matso – ma ta nauva carna aire?” Ar i *airimor hanquenter: “Lá.” 
	13 Ar Ħangai quente: “Qui quén carna úpoica apiénen loico ape er mici matsor sine, ma ta oluva úpoica?” Ar i *airimor hanquenter: “É oluvas úpoica.”
	14 Ar Ħangai hanquente: “Sie nar lie sina ar nóre sina inyen, ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. Ar sie nar ilye cardar máltato, ar ya talalte ninna ve annar tasse: Úpoica nás!”

	8 “Mine is the silver, and mine the gold,” is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. 9 “This second house shall have a glory greater than the glory of the first one,” says the Lord of Hosts. 10 “And in this place I shall give peace,” is the saying of the Lord of Hosts.
	11 In the ninth month, in the four-and-twentieth day, in the second year of Darius, the Lord's word came through Haggai the Prophet, saying: “Thus says the Lord of Hosts: Now ask the priests about the law, thus: 12 If a person is carrying holy meat in his folded cloak, and the folding of the cloak touches bread or cooked food or wine or oil or other food – will that be made holy?” And the priests answered: “No.”
	13 And Haggai said: “If a person made unclean by touching a corpse touches one among these foods, will that become unclean?” And the priests answered: “Indeed it will become unclean.” 
	14 And Haggai answered: “So is this people and this nation to me, is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. And so are all deeds of your hands, and what they bring to me as gifts there: It is unclean!

	15 Ar sí, á cime aure sinallo ar auressen yar tuluvar: Nó ondo náne panyana to ondo i Cordasse i Héruva, 16 íre mo túle ori-cumbenna lestaiva *yúquean, enger rie quean. Íre mo lende i *vormanna tucien veni *lepenquean, enger rie *yúquean. 17 Ar penten le uriénen ar orio hestiénen ar *helexenen, nancárala ilqua yan mólelde máldanten, ananta ualde nanwenne ninna,” ná i Héruo quetie. 18 “Ar sí, á cime aure sinallo ar auressen yar tuluvar – i canta *yúqueanya aurello i nertea astasse, i aurello yasse i Corda i Héruva náne tulcaina. Á cime: 19 I erde en ea i haurasse, lá? I liantasse, i *relyávalda ar i *erdorva en uar ánie yávelta. Mal aure sinallo aistuvan.”
	20 Ar i Héruo quetta túle mi attea lú Ħangaienna, mí canta *yúqueanya aure i astasse, quétala: 21 “Queta Seruvável i nórecánonna Yehúro: Paluvan menel cemenye. 22 Nuqueruvan i arhanwa araniéron, ar nancaruvan melehte i araniéron i nórion, ar nuqueruvan luncar ar i lelyar tainen, ar i roccor ar roqueniltar tuluvar undu, ilquen hánoryo macilden. 23 Enta auresse,” ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion, “mapuvan lyé, a Seruvável núronya, yondorya Hyealtiel,” ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion. “Ar panyuvan lye ve *lihtamille, an lyé icílien,” ná i quetie i Héruo Hossion.

	15 And now, give heed from this day and in days that shall come: Before a stone was placed on a stone in the Lord's Temple, 16 when one came to a grain-heap of twenty measures,  were only ten. When one went to the vat to draw fifty vessels,  were only twenty. 17 And I struck you with burning and with withering of grain and with hail, destroying everything for which you worked with your hands, and yet you did not return to me,” is the Lord's saying. 18 “And now, give heed from this day and in days that shall come – from the four  twentieth day in the ninth month, from the day when the Temple of the Lord was established. Give heed: 19 The seed is still in the barn, no? The vine, the figtree and the pomegranate still have not given their fruit. But from this day I will bless.”
	20 And the Lord's word came for a second time to Haggai, on the four  twentieth day in the month, saying: 21 “Say to Zerubbabel the governor of Judah: I will shake heaven and earth. 22 I will overturn the throne of kingdoms, and I will undo the might of the kingdoms of the nations, and I will overturn wagons and  who travel by them, and the horses and their knights shall come down, each one by his brother's sword. 23 On that day,” is the saying of the Lord of Hosts, “I shall take you, o Zerubbabel my servant, son of Shealtiel,” is the saying of the Lord of Hosts. 24 “And I shall put you like a signet ring, for you I have chosen,” is the Lord of Hosts.


