Yóel
Joel

RANTA 1 
I Héruo quetta ya túle Yóelenna, yondorya Petúel. 2 Hlara si, a yárar, ar á lasta, illi i marir i nóresse! Ma amartie nat sina réldassen, hya mi atarildaron rí? 3 Nyara pa sa hinaldain, ar hínaldar na nyaruvar hínaltain, ar hínaltar an *nónaren: 4 Ya i ammatila *salquecápo hehtane, i úmea *salquecápo amátie, ar ya i úmea *salquecápo hehtane, i nessa *salquecápo amátie, ar ya i nessa 
*salquecápo hehtane, i nancarila *salquecápo amátie. 5 Ola coive, elde i quatir inde limpenen, ar sama nyenye ar nainie, castanen i lisse limpeo, an anaies aucirna songaldallo, 6 An lie utúlie ama nórenyanna, rimba ar pen nóte; nelciryar nar rávo nelci, ar samis ravenneo carcar. 7 Nancáries liantassenya, acáries *relyávaldanya cindar! Acáriéses helda ar ahátie se undu; olvaryar anaier cárine ninqui.

CHAPTER 1 
The Lórd's word that came to Joel, son of Pethuel. 2 Hear this, o old ones, and listen, all that dwell in the land! Has this thing happened in your days, or in your fathers' days? 3 Tell about it to your children, and let your children tell their children, and their children yet another generation. 4 What the devouring locust left behind, the swarming locust has eaten, and what the swarming locust left behind, the young locust has eaten, and what the young locust has eaten, the destroying locust has eaten. 5 Become awake, you that fill yourselves with wine, and have weeping and lament, by reason of the sweet wine, for it has been cut off from your mouth. 6 For a people has come up upon my land, numerous and without number; its teeth are a lion's teeth, and it has the fangs of a lioness. 7 It has destroyed my vine, it has made my fig tree splinters! It has made it naked and has thrown it down; its branches have been made white.

	8 Á naina ve vende vaina lannessen findiva naina nesseryo veru! 9 I *yanca oriva ar i *yanca limpeva anaier aucirne i Héruo Coallo. I *airimor, i Héruo núror, samir naire. 10 I resta anaie nancarna, i talan same naire, an i ore ná nancarna, i vinya limpe vanwa ná, i millo loita. 11 Na nucumne, a *alamor! Á naina, elde i molir tarwassen liantassion, pa i *mulmore ar i *findore, an i resto yávie equelétie. 12 I liantasse ehestie, i *relyávalda loita, yú i *erdeorva ar i *nindorne ar i orva; é ilye i aldar i resto ehestier, an alasse ehestie atanillon. 

	8 Lament like a maiden clad in clothes of hair laments the husband of her youth! 9 The offering of grain and the offering of wine have been cut off from the House of the Lórd! The priests, the Lórd's servants, have grief. 10 The field has been destroyed, the ground has grief, for the grain is destroyed, the new wine is gone, the oil fails. 11 Be humiliated, o cultivators! Lament, you that work in gardens of vines, about the wheat and the barley, for the harvest of the field has perished. 12 The vine has withered, the fig-tree fails, also the pomegrenate  and the palm and the apple; indeed all the trees of the field have withered, for joy has withered from men.

	13 Nuta i quilta *os le, ar á naina, a *airimor! Na yaimie, elde i nar núror ara i *yangwa! Tula, a caita ter i lóme mi lanni findiva, elde i nar núror Ainonyava, an i  *yanca oriva ar i *yanca limpeva nar hépaine i Coallo Ainolvava. 14 Á airita lamate! Yala queni aire ocomienna! Á comya i amyárar ar ilye i marir i nóresse i Coanna i Héru Ainoldava, ar yama i Hérunna!

	13 Bind the belt around you, and lament, o priests! Be wailing, you that are servants by the altar! Come, lie through the night in clothes of hair, you that are servants of my God, for the offering of grain and the offering of wine are being kept from the House of our God. 14 Sanctify a fast! Summon people to a holy gathering! Gather the elders and all that dwell in the land to the House of the Lórd your God, and cry to the Lórd!

	15 Ai i rénen! An i Héruo ré hare ná, ar ve nancarie i Ilúvalallo tuluvas. 16 Ma i matta ua aucirna epe henduldat, é alasse ar márie i Coallo Ainolvava?  17 I erdi qualir mí parca cén. I haurar nar atalantie, ar i orihaurar anaier narcane undu, an i ore ehestie oa. 18 Manen i celvar ñónar! I yaxirimbi nar rúcine, pan pénalte nessele. Yú i lamári mámaiva perpérar. 19 Elyenna, a Héru, yamuvan! An ruive amamátie i ravando nesseler, ar nár ururtaye ilye aldar i resto. 20 Yú i verce celvar milyar lye, an i celumi nenwa olólier parce, ar ruive amamátie i ravando nesseler.

	15 Alas for  the day! For the Lord's day is near, and like a destruction from the Almighty it shall come. 16 Is the food not cut off before your eyes, indeed joy and gladness from the House of our God? 17 The seeds die in the dry soil. The barns are in ruin, and the granaries have been torn down, for the grain has withered away. 18 How the animals are groaning! The multitudes of cows are confused, since they are lacking pasture. Also the flocks of sheep are suffering. 19 To you, o Lórd, I will cry! For fire has consumed the pastures of the wilderness, and fire has burnt all the trees of the field. 20 Also the wild animals long for you, for the streams of water have become dry, and fire has consumed the pastures of the wilderness.

RANTA 2 
Alde lamya i róma mi Síon, ar yama rambe ohtava aire orontinyasse! Illi i marir i nóresse na papuvar, an i Héruo ré túla, an hare nas – 2 ré morniéva ar huinéva, ré lumbuiva ar tumna moriva. Ve ára vintala to i oronti, rimba ar taura lie túla! Lá engie lie ve sá enwine randallon; yú lá euva taite lie ata, i loassen indyoldaron ar indyoltaron. 3 Opo te ruive ammate, ar ca te ruive urya. I nóre opo te ná ve Éreno tarwa, mal cata te ea lusta erume. É lá ea uşwe tello. 4 Nemestalta ná ve roccoron nemesta, ar ve roqueni norilte. 5 Ve i ran norolleron, i orotingassen capilte, ve i ran náreo ruiveva ya ammate i parca salque, ve taura lie *partana ohtan. 6 Ténen queni nar ruhtaine; ilye cendeler olólier marye. 

CHAPTER 2
You sound the horn in Zion, and cry a shout of war on my holy mountain! Let all that dwell in the land tremble, for the Lórd's day is coming, for it is near – 2 a day of darkness and of gloom, a day of clouds and profound dark. Like dawn spreading on the mountains, a numerous and mighty people is coming!  has not existed a people like it from ancient ages; also  shall not be such a people again, in the years of your descendants and their descendants. 3 In front of them a fire consumes, and behind them a fire blazes. The land in front of them is like the garden of Eden, but behind them is an empty desert. Indeed  is not  escape from them. 4 Their appearance is like the appearence of horses, and like knights they run. 5 Like the noise of chariots, on the mountain-tops they jump, like a flame of fire that consumes the dry grass, like a mighty people arranged for war. 6 Because of them people are being being terrified; all faces have become pale.

7 Ve nerdor norilte, ve nér ohtava menilte ama i ramba, ar levilte ompa ilquen tieryassen, ar ualte langa i exion mentier. 8 Ente, ualte nire quén i exe; ilya veo lelya véra malleryasse, ar i ehtinnar lantalte pen náve harne. 9 Capilte i ostonna, norilte i rambasse, *retilte ama mir i coar, mittalte ter i lattini ve pilu. 10 Opo te cemen pale, menel rúma, Anar Işilye olóliet morne, ar i tinwi tucir nan silmelta.

7 As strong men they run, like a man of war they go up the wall, and they move forward each one in his paths, and they do not cross the route of the others. 8 Furthermore, they do not press  one another; every ablebodied man goes on his own road, and against the spears they fall without being wounded. 9 They jump upon the city, they run on the wall, they climb up into the houses, they enter through the windows like a thief. 10 Before them earth trembles, heaven shifts, Sun and Moon have become dark, and the stars pull back their shine.

	11 Ar i Héru care ómarya hláraina opo hosserya; an *estolierya ita hoa ná, an náse taura ar care quettarya anwa; an túra i Héruo ré ná, ar ita rúcima. Ar man pole termare sasse? 12 Ananta yando sí, quete i Héru, nanwena ninna quanda endaldanen ar lamatenen ar nyenyenen. 13 Ar á narca endalda ar lá larmaldar, ar nanwena i Héru Ainoldanna, an isse raina ar oravila ná, telwa rúşenna ar alya Erulisseo, ar arwa inwisto pa i naicele. 14 Man ista? Cé vistauvas sámarya ar samuva inwis, lavila aistie lemya cata se, *yanca oriva ar *yanca limpeva i Héru Ainoldan.

	11 And the Lórd made his voice heard in front of his host, and his camp is very great, and he  is great and makes his word  true , for great is the day of the Lórd, and very terrible. And who can remain on it? 12 And yet even now, says the Lórd, return to me with your whole heart and with fasting and with weeping. 13 And tear your heart and not your clothes, and return to the Lórd your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and rich in grace, and having a change of mind about the anguish . 14 Who knows? Maybe he will change his mind and will have regrets, letting blessing remain behind him, a sacrifice of grain and a sacrifice of wine to the Lórd your God.

	15 Á lamya i róma mi Síon! Á airita lamate, yala queni aire ocomienna! 16 Á tala uo i lie, á airita i ocombe, á comya i amyárar, á tala uo i híni ar i lapsi sucila ilin; i ender na hehta şamberya, ar i indis acairişamberya. 17 I *airimor, i Héruo núror, na nauvar yaimie imbe i andosan ar i *yangwa, ar alte quete: Órava lielyasse, ar áva lave rantalyan ve aryon perpere yaiwe, túraina lo i nóri! Mana castanen queni quetuvar imíca i lier: Masse Ainolta? 
	18 Tá i Héru sáme uryala cimie nóreryava, ar oravanes lieryasse. 19 Ar i Héru hanquente ar quente lieryanna: Yé, mentauvan lenna ore ar limpe ar millo, ar nauvalde quátine tainen, ar uan ambe caruva le nucumnie imíca i nóri. 20  Panyuvan i formenquen háya lello, ar eluvanyes mir parca ar lusta ravanda, ar tellerya euva i Númenya earenna. Ar i şaura ne sello menuva ama, ar holwerya ortuva. An Isse acárie túre nati!

	15 Sound the horn in Zion! Sanctify a fast, call people to a holy convocation! 16 Bring together the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, bring together the children and the babies drinking milk; the groom is to leave his chamber, and the bride her bridal chamber. 17 The priests, the Lórd's servants, are to be wailing between the entrance-hall and the altar, and they are to say: Have mercy on your people, and do not let your part as heir suffer scorn, being ruled by the nations! For what reason should people say among the peoples: Where is their God ? 
	18 Then the Lórd had a burning concern for his land, and he had mercy on his people. 19 And the Lórd answered and said to his people: Behold, I will send to you grain and wine and oil, and you will be filled with them, and I shall no more make you a humilation among the nations. 20 I will put the northerner  far from you, and I will drive him into a dry and empty wilderness, and his rear shall be towards the Western sea. And the foul smell from him will go up, and his stench will rise. For He has done great things!

	21 Áva ruce, a nóre! Na valima ar sama alasse, an i Heru acárie túre nati! 22 Áva ruce, verce celvar! An i ravando nesseler olólier laice, an i alda ocólie yáverya, ar i *relyávalda ar i liantasse ánier yávietta! 23 A Síono yondor, na valime ar sama alasse mí Héru Ainolda! An antas len i ulo tuiléva mí vanima lesta, ar tyaris ulya len i ulo – i ulo quelleva ar i ulo tuiléva – ve nóvo. 24 Ar i *vattalami nauvar quante orio, ar i *vormallon i limpe ar i millo celúvar han i ríma. 25 Ar antauvan len nan i yávie i loaron yassen i úmea *salquecápo mante sa – i nessa *salquecápo, i nancarila *salquecápo ar i ammatila *salquecápo, hoa hossenya ya mentanen mici lenna. 26 Ar matuvalde úvesse ar nauvar quátine, ar laituvalde i esse i Héru Ainoldo, ye elengie lenna elmendalínen, ar lienya lá nauva nucumna. 27 Ar istuvalde in inye ea Israélo endesse, ar i nanye i Héru Ainolda, ar lá ea exe, ar lienya lá oi nauva nucumna. 


	21 Do not fear, o land! Be happy and have joy, for the Lórd has done great things! 22 Do not fear, wild animals! For the pastures of the wilderness have become green, and the tree has borne its fruit, and the fig-tree and the vine have given their harvest! 23 O sons of Zion, be happy and have joy in the Lórd your God! For he gives you the rain of spring in a proper measure, and he causes to pour for you the rain – the rain of autumn and the rain of spring – as before. 24 For the threshing floors shall be full of grain, and from the vats the wine and the oil shall flow beyond the rim. 25 And I shall give you back the harvest of the years in which the swarming locust ate it – the young locust, the destroying locust and the devouring locust, my great army that I sent among you. 26 And you will eat in abundance and will be filled, and you will praise the name of the Lórd your God, who has behaved towards you with wonders, and my people shall not be humilated. 27 And you will know that I am in the midst of Israel, and tha tI am the Lórd your God, and  is not another, and my people shall not ever be humiliated.

	28 Ar tuluva epeta in ulyauvan fairenya ilya hrávenna, ar yondoldar ar selyeldar quetuvar ve Erutercánor, yáre nerildannar olori tuluvar, nesse nerildar cenuvar mauri. 29 Ar yú i hanwe ar inye mólinnar ulyauvan fairenya ente auressen. 30 Ar antauvan tanwar mi menel cemenye, serce ar náre ar tarmar usqueva. 31 Anar oluva mornie ar Işil serce, nó i Héruo túra ar rucima ré tuluva. 32 Ar tuluva in ilquen ye yale i Héruo essenen nauva rehtana, ar mi Oron Síon ar mi Yerúsalem euvar i úşar, ve i Héru equétie, ar imíca i lemyar euvar i yaluvainar lo i Héru.

	28 And it shall come  thereafter that I will pour my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters will speak like prophets, to your old men dreams will come, and your young men will see visions. 29 And also upon the male and female slaves I shall pour my spirit in those days. 30 And I will give signs in heaven and earth, blood and flame and pillars of smoke. 31 The Sun shall become darkness and the Moon blood, before the Lord's great and terrible day shall come. 32 And it will come  that everyone who calls upon  the Lórd's name shall be saved, and in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be the ones fleeing, as the Lórd has said, and among  who remain shall be the ones going to be called by the Lórd.

RANTA 3 
An yé, mi ente rí ar enta lúmesse, íre vistauvan i umbar Yehúro ar Yerusalémo, 2 comyauvan ilye i lier, ar taluvanyet undu mir i Yehóhyafat·nande, ar mittuvan mir namie aselte tasse, pa lienya ar Israel, rantanya ve aryon ya ivintielte imíca i nóri, ar nórienya hyarnelte. 3 Ar hantente *şanwali lienyan ar ánier seldo *imbacinden, ar avácier vende limpen, sucieltan. 4 Ente, mana elde nin, a Tír ar Síron ar ilye Filisteo ménar? Ma ece len ñete ahtarie ninna? Qui ece len ñete ahtarie ninna, lintave, limbive tyaruvan ahtarielda nanwene to véra careldanna. 5 Pan amápielde telpenya ar maltanya, ar ocólielde máre harmanyar mir cordaldar, 6 ar pan i queni Yehúro ar i queni Yerúsalémo avácielde i quenin Yávano, talieldan te háya vehteltallo – 7 yé, inye valtauva te et i nómello yanna avácieldet, ar tyaruvan ahtarielda nanwene véra careldanna, 8 ar vacuvan yondoldar ar selyeldar mannar quenion Yehúro, ar vacuvaltet i nerin Hyévo, haira nórenna. An i Héru equétie.

CHAPTER 3
For behold, in those days and in that time, when I shall change the fate of Judah and Jerusalem, 2 I shall gather all the peoples, and I shall bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and I shall enter into judgement with them there, about my people and Israel, my part as heir which they have scattered among the nations, and my country they split. 2 And they threw lots for my people and have given a boy for a prostitute, and have sold a maiden for wine, for them to drink. 4 Furthermore, what are you to me, o Tyre and Zidon and all regions of Philistea? Is it possible for you to get revenge against me? If it is possible for you to get revenge against me, quickly, speedily I shall cause your revenge to return to upon your own head, 6 and since the people of Judah and the people of Jerusalem you have sold to the people of Javan, for you to bring them far from their dwelling-place – 7 behold, I shall stir them out of the place to which you have sold them, and I shall cause your revenge to return upon your own head, 8 and I shall sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of people from Judah, and they will sell them to the men of Shebah, to a far-off land. For the Lord has spoken.

	9 Yama si imíca i nóri: Á airita ohta, á valta i nerdor! Ilye i neri ohtava na tuluvar hari, na tuluvar ama! 10 Á palpa hyarildar mir macili, ar i sicili liantasseldain mir ehti! I milya nér na quetuva: Nanye nerdo! 11 Na linte ar tula, ilye pelila nóri, ar ócoma! Tar tyara taurelyar unta, a Héru!	
	12 I nóri na nauvar valtane ar na tuluvar Yehóhyafat·nandenna, an tasse haruvan namien ilye i pelila nóri! 13 Á menta i circa, an i yávie manwa ná; alde *vatta, an i *limpevorma quanta ná; i *vormar céluar han i ríma! An ulculta túra ná. 	

	9 Cry  this among the nations: Sanctify a war, stir up the strong men! All the men of war shall come near, shall come up! 10 Beat your plows into swords, and the knives for your vines into spears! The weak man shall say: I am a strong man! 11 Be quick and come, all surrounding nations, and assemble! Thither cause your mighty ones to descend, o Lórd! 
	12 Let the nations be stirred and come to the valley of Joshaphat, for there I shall sit to judge all the surrounding nations! 13  Send  the sickle, for the harves is ripe; you are to tread, for the winepress is full; the vats are flowing beyond the rim! For their evil is great.

	14 Liyúmeli, liyúmeli i Nandesse Namiéva! An i Héruo ré hare ná i Nandesse Namiéva! 15 Anar Işilye olóliet morne, ar i tinwi tucir nan silmelta. 16 Ar i Héru nauva rávea Síonello, ar caruvas ómarya hláraina Yerúsalemello, ar menel cemenye paluvat, mal i Héru nauva cauma lieryan, ar arta Israelindin. 17 Sie istuvalde in inye i Héru Ainolda ná, marila Sionde, aire orontinya. Tá Yerúsalem nauva aire, ar aianor uar languva ter sa ambe. 18 Ar martuva enta auresse in i orontillon tuluvar limbar lisse limpeva, ar i ambor celúvar ilimnen, ar ilye Yehúro nelli siruvar nennen, ar ehtele ettuluva et i Héruo Coallo, ar antauvas nén i Sittim·nanden.  19 Mirrandor oluva erume, ar Erom lusta ravanda, castanen i ormeo i lienna Yehúro. An et-ulyanelte nóreltasse serce pen cáma. 20 Mal Yehúrasse mo maruva tennoio, ar Yerúsalemesse *nónarello *nónarenna. 21 Ar onotuvan sercelta pen cáma, ya uan ononte pen cáma nóvo. Ar i Héru maruva mi Síon.

14 Multitudes, multitudes in the Valley of Judgment! For the Lórd's day is near in the Valley of Judgment! 15 The Sun and the Moon have become black, and the stars draw back their shine. 16 And the Lórd shall be roaring from Sion, and he will make his voice heard from Jerusalem, and heaven and earth shall tremble, but the Lórd will be a shelter for his people, and a stronghold for the Children of Israel. 17 Thus you shall know that I am the Lórd your God, dwelling in Sion, my holy mountain. Then Jerusalem shall be holy, and strangers will not cross through it more. 18 And it shall happen in that day that from the mountains  will come drops of sweet wine, and the hills will stream with milk, and all the brooks of Judah shall flow with water, and a wellspring will come out from the House of the Lórd, and it shall give water to the Valley of Shittim. 19 Egypt shall become a desert, and Edom an empty wilderness, by reason of the violence against the people of Judah. For they poured out in their land blood without guilt. 20 But in Judah one will dwell forever, and in Jerusalem from generation to generation. 21 And I will count their blood  without guilt, which I did not count without guilt previously. And the Lórd will dwell in Zion.

