MALACI

RANTA 1
Menta. I Héruo quetta Israélen, ter Malaci.

	2 “Emélien le,” quete i Héru.
	Mal maquetilde: “Manen eméliel me?”
	“Ma Ésau úne Yácovo háno?” ná i Héruo quetie. “Ananta emélien Yácov, 3 mal Ésau etévien, ar acárien orontiryar ravanda, ar i ranta ya camnes ve aryon ánien i erumeo savarin.”
	4 Pan Erom quéta: “Ómu anaielve rácine, encarastuvalve i atalantie nómi!” – sin quete i Héru Hossion: “Té carastuvar, mal inye narcuva undu! Mo estuva te i Nórie Ulcuva ar i lie ya coluva i Héruo rúşe tennoio!” 5 Ar henduldat cenuvat, ar elde quetuvar: “I Héru túra ná, yú han Israélo rénar.”
	6 Yondo anta alcar ataryan, ar núro heruryan. Mal qui inye atar, masse alcarinya? Ar qui inye heru, masse i rucie nillo? Sin quete i Héru Hossion lenna, a *airimor i nattirir essenya.” 
	Ar equétielde: “Manen nattirnelme esselya?”
	7 Paniénen *yangwanyasse massa ya ua poica!
	Mal elde equétier: “Manen acárielme lyé úpoica?”
	Quetieldanen: “Sarno i Héruva faica ná!”

A message. The word of the Lórd for Israel, through Malachi.

	2 “I have loved you,” says the Lórd.
	But you ask: “How have you loved us?”
	“Was Esau not Jacob's brother?” is the saying of the Lórd. “And yet I have loved Jacob, 3 but Esau I have hated, and I have made his mountains a wilderness, and the part that he received as heir I have given to the jackals of the desert.”
	4 Since Edom is saying: “Though we have been broken, we shall rebuild the ruined places” – thus says the Lórd of Hosts: “They will build, but I will tear down! One will call them the Country of Evil and the people that shall carry the Lórd's wrath forever!” 5 And your eyes shall see, and you shall say: “The Lórd is mighty, also beyond the borders of Israel.”
	6 A son gives glory to his father, and a servant to his lord. But if I am a father, where  my glory? And if I am a lord, where is the fear of me? So says Lórd of Hosts to you, o priests that despise my name.”
	And you have said: “How did we despise your name?”
	7 By placing on my altar bread that is not clean!
	But you have said: “How have we made you unclean?”
	By your saying: “The Lórd's table is contemptible!”

	8 Íre talalde laceníti celvar *yacien te, ma ta ua raica? Ar íre *yacilde *úlévime hya engwe celvar, ma ta ua raica? Áte neve anta nórecánolyan! Ma nauvas fastana lyénen? Ma camuvas lye mai?” quete i Héru Hossion.
	9 “Sí alde care arcande Erun: Á orava messe! As taiti *yancar máldalto, ma camuvas le mai?” quete i Héru Hossion.
	10 “Nai quén mici le holtuva i fennat, pustien le tintiello nári *yangwanyasse muntan! Uan same alasse lesse,” quete i Héru Hossion, “ar uan mapuva anna máldalto. 11 An essenya nauva túra imíca i nóri, yallo Anar orta yanna nútas. Ilya nómesse mo urtauva *nisque essenyan, ar poice annar, an essenya nauva túra imíca i nóri,” quete i Héru Hossion.
	12 “Mal elde carir sa úpoica íre quetilde: Sarno i Heruva anaie vahtina, ar: I matta sasse faica ná! 13 Ar quetilde: Mana cólo nas!, ar nattirildes,” quete i Héru Hossion.
	“Íre talalde harne hya *lalevíti hya engwe celvar ar *yacir te as annalda, ma camuvanyet máldalto?” quete i Héru. 14 “Na húna i úvoronda quén ye same hanwa celva lamáraryasse ar vandanen quete in antauvases, mal tá *yacis hastana celva i Herun. An inye túra aran ná,” quete i Héru Hossion, “ar mo rucuva essenyallo imíca i nóri.”

	8 When you  bring blind animals to sacrifice them, is that not wrong? And when you sacrifice lame or sickly animals, is that not wrong? Try giving them to your  governor! Will he be pleased by you? Will he receive you  well?” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	9 “Now you  make petition to God: Have mercy upon us! With such sacrifices from your hands, will he receive you well?” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	10 “Would that someone among you close the doors , to stop you form kindling fires on my altar for nothing! I do not have joy in you,” says the Lórd of Hosts, “and I do not take  gift from your  hands . 11 For my name shall be great among the nations, from where the Sun rises to where it sets. In every place one will burn incense to my name, and pure gifts, for my name shall be great among the nations,” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	12 “But you make it unclean when you say: The Lórd's table has been defiled, and: The food on it is contemptible!  13 And you say: What a burden it is!, and you despise it,” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	“When you bring wounded or lame or sickly animals and sacrifice them with your gift, am I to receive them from your hands?” says the Lórd of Hosts. 14 Cursed be the faithless person who has a male animal in his flock and by oath says that he will give it, but then he sacrifices a blemished  animal to the Lórd. For I am a great king,” says the Lórd of Hosts, and one will fear my name among the nations.” 

RANTA 2
Ar sí, sisse túla axan len, a *airimor: 2 “Qui ualde lasta, ar qui ualda panya endaldasse in antauvalde alcar essenyan,” quete i Héru Hossion, “tá mentauvan lenna i hútie, ar hútuvan mánaldar. É uhútien tai, pan loitanelde panya si endaldasse. 3 Yé, quetuvan narcave aryonildannar! Ar vintuvan múco cendeleldasse, i múco merendildaron, ar as ta nauvalde cóline oa! 4 Tá hanyuvalde i mentanenye axan sina lenna, tyarien vérenya as Lévi lemya,” quete i Héru Hossion. 5 “Vérenya enge óse, vére coiviéva ar raineva, ar antanen tú sen, as áya. Sie runces nillo, ar essenyava sámes caure. 6 Nanwa peantie enge antoryasse, ar ua enge úfailie péryatse. Mi raine ar mi téra lé vantanes asinye, ar rimbe náner i quernes loimallo. 7 An *airimo peu hepuvat istya, ar şanye queni cestuvar antoryallo, an náse tercáno i Héruo Hossion. 

CHAPTER 2
And now, here comes a commandment to you, o priests: 2 “If you do not listen, and if you do not lay on your heart that you are to give glory to my name,” says the Lórd of Hosts, “then I shall send to you the curse, and I shall curse your boons. Indeed I have cursed them, since you failed to lay this on your heart. 3 Behold, I shall speak harshly to your heirs! And I will scatter muck on your face, the muck of your feasts, and with that you shall be carried off! 4 Then you will understand that I sent this commandment to you, to cause my covenant with Levi to remain,” says the Lórd of Hosts. 5 “My covenant was with him, a covenant of life and of peace, and I gave them to him, together with awe. Thus he feared me, and of my name he had dread. 6 True instruction was in his mouth, and  was not injustice on his lips. In peace and in a straight manner he walked with me, and numerous where  that he turned from error. 7 For the lips  of a priest shall keep knowledge, and iaw people shall seek from his mouth, for he is a herald of the Lórd of Hosts.

8 Mal elde equérier inde i tiello. Atyárielde rimbali talta i şanyesse. Ahastielde Lévio vére,” quete i Héru Hossion. 9 Ar yú inye caruva le nattírine ar nucumne epe i quanda lie, pan ualde hempe tienyar, mal oloitier name ilye queni mí imya lé i şanyenen.”
	10 Ma illi mici vi uar same er Atar? Ma er Aino ua ontane vi? Manen ná i nalve úvoronde quén i exen ar carir atarilvaron vére úpoica? 11 Yehúra anaie úvoronda, ar faica nat anaie carna mi Yehúra ar Yerúsalem, an Yehúra acárie úpoica i Héruo melda yána, ar evéries selyenna ettelea aino. 12 Nai i Héru auciruva *lancoallon Yácova ilquen ye care sa – lá cimila man náse – ananta anta anna i Hérun Hossion. 
	13 Ar si ná i attea nat ya carilde: Niainen topilde i Héruo *yangwa – nyenyenen ar siquiénen – mal uas ambe mere cime i anna, hya camitas mi alasse máldalto. 
	14 Ar maquetilde: “Manen ná si?” 
	I casta ná in i Héru ná astarmo i nattosse imbe lyé ar nesselyo veri, yen anaiel úvoronda ómu náse verilya, nútina lyen vérenen. 

8 But you have turned yourselves from the path. You have caused numerous ones to totter in the law. You have marred the covenant of Levi,” says the Lórd of Hosts. 9 And I as well will make you despised and humiliated before the entire people, since you did not keep my ways, but have failed to judge all people in the same manner by the law.”
	10 Do not all among us have one Father? Did not one Deity create us? How is  that we are unfaithful one to the other and make our fathers' covenant unclean? 11 Judah has been unfaithful, and a contemptible thing has been done in Juda and Jerusalem, for Judah has made unclean the Lórd's beloved sanctuary, and he has gotten marred to the daughter of a foreign god. 12 May the Lórd cut off from the tents of Jacob everyone who does it – no matter who he is – and yet gives a gift to the Lórd of Hosts.
	13 And this is the second thing that you do: With tears   you cover the Lórd's alter – with weeping and with sighing – but he does not more heed the gift, or receive it in joy from your hands. 
	14 And you  ask: “How is this?”
	The reason is that the Lórd is a witness in the matter between you  and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been unfaithful although she is your wife, bound to you by covenant. 

	15 Ma lá ea Er ye se-carne, hroa ar faire véla? Ar mana i Er cesta? Híni i nar Eruo. Etta á varya inde faireldasse. Áva na úvoronda i verin nesselyo!
	16 “An etévien íre veru menta verirya oa,” quete i Héru, Israélo Aino, “ar manen queni otópier larmaltar ormenen,” quete i Héru Hossion. “Etta á varya inde faireldasse lá náven úvoronde.”
	17 Acárielde i Héru lumba quettaldainen. Maquétalde: “Mananen acárielmes lumba?” Quetiénen in ilquen ye care ulco mane ná mi Eruo hendu, ar i náse fastaina lo te. Hya maquetiénen: “Masse i Aino anamo?”

	15 Is there not One who made her, body and spirit alike? And what does the One seek? Children that are of God. Therefore protect yourselves in your spirit. Do not be unfaithful to the wife of your youth!
	16 “For I have hated when a husband sends his wife away,” says the Lórd, the Deity of Israel, “and how people have covered their garments with violence,” says the Lórd of Hosts. “Therefore protect yourselves in your spirit so as not to be unfaithful.”
	17 You have made the Lórd tired with your words. You are asking: “By what have we made him tired?” By saying that everyone who does evil is good in God's eyes, and that he is pleased by them. Or by asking: “Where is the Deity of justice?”

RANTA 3
“Yé, mentan tercánonya, sé ye caruva tienya manwa. I Héru ye cestalde tuluva lintave cordaryanna: Yé, túlas, i véreo vala ye milyanelde,” quete i Héru Hossion.
2 “Mal man pole termare i auresse ya tuluvas, man pole tare i auresse ya tanuvas inse? An náse ve i náre yeo poita tincor, ve i lipsa ion sovir. 3 Hamuvas poitala telpe ar cárala sa poica, ar caruvas i Lévioni poice, ar te-poituvas ve malta ar telpe. Sie oluvalte queni tálala annar i Hérunna failiesse. 4 Ar Yehúro ar Yerúsalemo anna fastuva i Héru, ve andanéya ar enwine loassen. 5 Ar tuluvan hare lenna namien, ar nauvan linta astarmo ana i carir ñúle ar i *hrúpuhtar, ar ana i antar húrala vandar ar i loitar paitya ye mole *paityalen, ar ana ye lumna i *verulóran ar i seldon pen atar, ar ana i querir oa i ettelea quén ar uar ruce nillo,” quete i Héru Hossion. 

CHAPTER 3
Behold, I send my herald, he who will make my path ready. The Lórd that you seek shall come quickly to his temple. Behold, he is coming, the angel that you long for,” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	2 “But who can remain in the day that he shall come, who can stand in the day that he shows himself? For he is like the fire of  who purifies metals, like the soap of  that wash. 3 He shall sit purifying silver and making it pure, and he shall make the Levites pure, and he shall purify them like gold and silver. Thus they will be come people bringing gifts to the Lórd in righteousness. 4 And Juda's and Jerusalem's gift shall please the Lórd, like long ago and in ancient years. 5 And I will come near to you to judge, and I shall be a swift witness against  who practice sorcery and  who fornicate, and against  that give lying oaths and  who fail to pay  who works for payment, and against who oppresses the widow and the boy without a father, and against  that turn away the foreign person and do not fear me,” says the Lórd of Hosts.

	6 “An inye i Héru ná; uan ahya. Ar elde nar Yehúro yondor; ualde metyane. 7 Ho atarildaron rí equérielde inde oa şanyenyallon ar uar ehépier tai. Nanwena ninna, ar nanwenuvan lenna,” quete i Héru Hossion. 
	8 “Ma atani lertar pile i Hérullo? Mal elde pílar nillo. Ono quetilde: Manen elme ipílier lyello? Pa i quaistar ar i satye annar! 9 Hútiénen nalde húne, an nillo elde ipílier, i quenda lie. 10 Á tala i quanda quaista mir i coa harweva, ar euva matta coanyasse! É áni tyasta sie,” quete i Héru Hossion. “Cena qui uan pantuva len menelo lattini, ulyala lenna aistie úvesse.  11 Ruhtauvan i *salquecápor oa lello, ar ualte nancaruva i cemeno yávie, ar i resto liantasse ua loituva yave len,” quete i Héru Hossion. 12 “Tá ilye lier estuvar le valime, an elde nauvar írima nóre,” quete i Héru Hossion.

	6 “For I am the Lórd; I do not change. And you are the sons of Judah; you are not finished off. 7 From the days of your fathers you have turned yourselves away from my laws and have not kept them. Return to me, and I shall return to you,” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	8 “May humans steal from the Lórd? But you are stealing from me. But you say: How have we stolen from you? Concerning the tithes and the set-aside gifts! 9 With a curse you are cursed, for from me you have stolen, the entire people. 10 Bring the whole tithe into the house of treasury, and there will be food in my house. Indeed test me so,” says the Lórd of Hosts. “See if I will not open for you the windows of heaven, pouring upon you blessing in abundance. 11 I will scare the grasshoppers away from you, and they will not destroy the harvest of the earth, and the vine of the field will not fail to bear for you,” says the Lórd of Hosts. 12 “Then all peoples will call you happy, for you will be a desirable land,” says the Lórd of Hosts.

13 “Quetilde narce quettar pa ni,” quete i Héru. “Ananta maquetilde: Mana equétielme pa lyé?
14 Quetilde: Mo ñete munta návenen Eruo núro. Mana mána samilve pan ihílielve namnaryar ar avantier ve qui nairesse epe i Héru Hossion? 15 Mal sí elve estar i turquimar valime, an carilte ulco ar alir; tyastalte Eru, ananta uşilte.”
	16 I runcer i Hérullo tá caramper uo, ar i Héru cimne ar hlasse. Ar as sé parma enyaliéva náne técina, pa i runcer i Hérullo ar sanner pa esserya.
	17 “Ar nauvalte ninye,” quete i Héru Hossion. “Mí aure ya caruvan cardanya nauvalte véra harmanya. Ar oravuvan tesse, ve atar órava yondoryasse ye núrorya ná. 18 Ar ata istuvalde i faila i olcallo –  ye Eruo núro ná yello uas anaie núrorya.”

13 “You speak harsh words about me,” says the Lórd. “And yet you ask: What have we spoken concerning you? 14 You say: One obtains nothing by being God's servant. What boon do we have since we have followed his statutes and have walked as if in grief before the Lórd of Hosts? 15 But now we call the haughty ones happy, for they do evil and thrive; they put God to the test, and yet they escape.”
	16  that feared the Lórd then spoke together, and the Lórd gave heed and heard. And with him a book of remembrance was written, about those that feared the Lórd and thought about his name.
	17 “And they shall be mine,” says the Lórd of Hosts. “In the day that I shall do my deed they shall be my own treasure. And I will have mercy on them, like a father has mercy on his son who is his servant. 18 And you shall again know the righteous one from the wicked one –  who is God's servant from  who has not been his servant.”

RANTA 4
“An yé! Túla i aure ya urta ve urna, ar ilye i turquimar ar i carir ulco nauvar ve lisce. Ar i aure ya tuluva ammatuva te,” quete i Héru Hossion, “lá lavila şundun hya olvan lemya. 2 Mal elden i rucir essenyallo Anar failiéva ortuva ar caluva, arwa nestiéno rámaryatse, ar etemenuvalde ar capuvar ve *mondoller leryaine i *celvacoallo.
	3 Ar *vattuvalde undu i olcar, an nauvalte ve asto nu tallunildat i auresse ya caruvan cardanya,” quete i Héru Hossion.
	4 “Alde enyale Móses núronyo şanye, ya antanen sen Ħorevesse i quanda Israélen, peantier ar namnar. 5 Yé! Mentan lenna Elía i Erutercáno, nó i Héruo túra ar rúcima aure. 6 Ar queruvas atarion enda yondonnar, ar yondoron enda atarinnar, ni-pustien tuliello ar hútiello cemen nancariénen.”

CHAPTER 4
“For behold!  comes the day that burns like an oven, and all the haughty ones and  who do evil shall be like straw. And the day that shall come will consume them,” says the Lórd of Hosts, “not letting root or branch remain. 2 But to you that fear my name the Sun of righteousness shall rise and shine, having healing in its wings, and you shall go forth and jump like calves released from the stall.
	3 And you shall trample down the wicked ones, and they shall be like dust under your foot-soles on the day that I shall do my deed,” says the Lórd of Hosts.
	4 “Recall you Moses my servant's law, which I gave to him at Horeb for all Israel, instructions and statutes. 5 Behold! I send to you Elijah the Prophet, before the Lórd's great and terrible day. 6 And he shall turn the heart of fathers to sons, and the heart of sons to fathers, to refrain me from coming and from cursing  earth with destruction.”


