OVALYA    
Obadiah

Ovalyo maur. 
	Sin quete i Hér Héru Eromenna: Menta ahlárielme i Hérullo, manen tercáno náne mentaina i nórennar quetien: Alve orta, alve mene senna mahtien! 2 Yé, lye-caruvan pitya imíca i nóri; nauval ita nattirna. 3 Turquima endalya uhúrie lyen, elye ye mare i cilyassen mí ondo, elye yeo vehte orwa ná, ye equétie endalyasse: Man ni-taluva undu i talamenna? 4 Ómu caril imle orwa ve şoron, ar panyal *haustalya imíca i eleni, lye-taluvan undu talo. 5 Qui arpor túler lyenna, qui pilur i lómisse – manen atalantea nalye! – ma ualte pilumne rie ya farne tien? Qui i comyar *tiumar tulumner lyenna, ma ualte lavumne *tiumalin lemya?  

Obadiah's vision.
	This says the Lord Lord  to Edom: A message we have heard from the Lord, how a herald was being sent to the nations to say: Let us arise, let us go against him to fight! 2 Behold, I will make you small among the nations; you will be extremely despised. 3 Your haughty heart has lied to you, you who dwell in the clefts in the rock, you whose haunt is high, who has said in your heart: Who will bring me down to the ground? 4 Though you make yourself high like an eagle, and you put your nest among the stars, I shall bring you down from there. 5 If robbers came to you, if thieves in the night – how ruinous you are! – would they not steal only what sufficed for them? If  who gather grapes were to come to you, would they not allow some grapes to remain?

	6 Manen Ésau anaie tercestana! Manen nurtane harmaryar anaier píline! 7 Ilye i neri as i sámel vére lye-ementayer i rénanna. I neri as i sámel raine tyarner lye save hurultar. Turunelte lye. I manter massalya panyaner neuma lyen. “Lá ea hande sesse!”

	6 How Esau has been searched through! How his hidden treasures have been stolen! 7 All the men with whom you have a covenant have brought you to the border. The men with whom you had peace caused you to believe their lies. They conquered you.  that ate your bread set a snare for you. “There is no intelligence in him!”

	8 Ma ua martuva enta auresse, ná i Héruo quetie, i tyaruvan sailar auta Eromello ar hande orontello Ésauva? 9 Ar nerdolyar nauvar ruhtane, a Téman, tyarien ilquen mici te náve aucirna orontello Ésauva. Castanen nahtiéno – 10 castanen ormeo ana Yácov hánolya – nucumnie untupuva lye, ar nauval aucirna tennoio. 11 Mí aure yasse táranel ara, mí aure yasse ettelear tulyaner hosserya oa ve etyar ar queni hyane nórellon lender ter andoryar, ar pa Yerúsalem hantelte *şanwali – tá yú elye náne ve quén mici té. 12 Ual carne mai tiriénen i auresse hánoryo – i auresse *úmartarya. Ual carne mai samiénen alasse pa Yehúro yondor i auresse atalantelto. Ual carne mai quetiénen turquime quettar i auresse şangiéva. 13 Ual carne mai meniénen ter i ando lienyava mí aure yasse úro hirne te. Ual carne mai, yando elye, yétiénen perperielta mí aure yasse úro hirne te. Ual carne mai mapiénen armaltar mí aure yasse úro hirne te. 14 Ual carne mai tariénen i şancasse i malleo, aucirien i névaner uşe. Ual carne mai rembiénen i lemner i auresse şangiéva.

	8 Will it not happen in that day, is the Lord's saying, that I shall cause wise ones to pass from Edom and intelligence from the mountain of Esau? 9 And your strong men shall be terrified, o Teman, so as to cause everyone among them to be cut of from the mountain of Esau. By reason of murder – 10 by reason of violence against Jacob your brother – humiliation shall cover you, and you shall be cut off forever. 11 In the day when you were standing by, in the day when strangers lead his army away as exiles and people from other nations went through his gates, and about Jerusalem they threw lots – then you as well was like one among them. 12 You did not do well by watching on the day of your brother – on the day of his misfortune. You did not do well by having joy over  the sons of Judah on the day of their downfall. You did not do well by speaking haughty words on the day of tribulation. 13 You did not do well by going through the gate of my people in the day when evil found them. You did not do well, even you, by looking at their suffering on the day when evil found them. You did not do well by seizing their goods in the day that evil found them. 14 You did not do well by standing in the split of the road, to cut off  that were trying to flee. You did not do well by entrapping  that remained on the day of tribulation.

	15 An i Héruo aure hare ná ilye i nórin. Tambe acárielde, síve nauva carna len. Cardalyar nanwenuvar carelyanna. 16 An ve usúcielde aire orontinyasse, ilye i nóri sucuvar pen metta. É sucuvalte ar *hlucuvalte, ar oluvalte ve au lá oi engelte. 17 Mal Oron Síonde euvar i uşir, ar nauvas aire, ar Yácovo nosse haryuvar armaltar. 18 Ar Yácovo nosse nauva ruive, ar Yósefo nosse náre, mal Ésauo nosse nauva lisci. Ar nartuvatte, ar ammatuvatte te, ar euva *úquen ye lemya Ésauo nosseo. An i Héru equétie. 19 Ar Hyarmeno queni haryuvar Ésauo oron, ar i Tumna Nóriéno queni haryuvar i Filistyar. Yú haryuvalte Efraímo resta ar Samário resta, ar Venyamin haryuva Ilear. 20 Ar i náner etyar mici cumbe sina Israelindion, i nar mici Canáanyar tenna Sarefat, ar i etyar Yerúsalemello, haryuvar Hyarmeno ostor.  21 Ar *rehtoli tuluvar ama Oron Síonna namien Ésauo oron, ar i aranie nauva i Héruo.

	15 For the Lord's day is near for all the nations. As you have done, so  will be done to you. Your deeds shall return upon your head. 16 For like you have been drinking on my holy mountain, all the nations will drink without end. Indeed they shall drink and shall swallow, and they will become as if they did not ever exist. 17 But on Mount Zion shall be  that fle, and it shall be holy, and the house of Jacob shall possess their goods. 18 And Jacob's house shall be a fire, and Joseph's house a flame, but the house of Esau shall be straws. And they  will consume them, and  will be no one who remains of the house of Esau. For the Lord has spoken. 19 For the people of the South shall possess the mountain of Esau, and the people of the Low Country shall possess the Philistines. They will also possess the field of Ephraim and the field of Samarea, and Benjamin will possess Gilead. 20 And  that are exiles among this group of the Children of Israel, that are among the Canaanites as far as Zarephath, and the exiles from Jerusalem, shall possess the cities of the South. 21 And saviors will come up to Mount Sion to judge the mountain of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lord's.


