QOHELETH
(Ecclesiastes)

RANTA 1
Quettar Coheléto, Laviro yondo, aran Yerúsalemesse.
	2 Lustie mi lustiéron, quéta Cohelet, lustie mi lustiéron; ilqua lustie ná! 3 Mana ñetie atan same ilya mólomeryanen yanen mótas nu Anar? 4 *Nónare auta ar *nónare túla, mal cemen termare tennoio. 5 Anar orta ar Anar núta, ar nómeryanna tulis rimpa ortien tasse ata. 6 I súre ména Hyarmenna ar quéra insa Formenna – quérala, quérala insa ménas, ar querieryannar nanwenis. 7 Ilye i síri menir earenna, mal ear ua quanta; i nómenna yanna i síri menir, tar nanwenilte menien. 8 Ilye i quettar carir mo lumba, han ya nér pole quete. I hen ua carna quanta ceniénen, ar i hlas ua quátina hlariénen. 9 Ya amartie ná ya martuva, ar ya anaie carna ná ya nauva carna, ar ea munta vinya nu Anar. 10 Ma ea nat pa ya mo quete: “Ela si! Nas vinya” – ? Yando sí engies ter oireli. Ya ea enge nó elve. 11 Lá ea enyalie iva enger nóvo, ar yú in túlar apa lá euva enyalie as i tuluvar apa té. 

CHAPTER 1 
Words of Qoheleth, David's son, king in Jerusalem.
	2 Emptiness of emptinesses, Qoheleth is saying, emptiness of emptinesses; everything is emptiness! 3 What gain does man have by all his hard work with which he toils under the Sun? 4 A generation passes and a generation is coming, but earth remains forever. 5 The sun rises and the sun sets; and to its place it comes rushing to rise there again. 6 The wind is going southwards and turns itself northwards – turning, turning itself it is going, and to its turnings it returns. 7 All the rivers go to the sea, but the sea is not full; to the place to which the rivers go, thither they return to go. 8 All the words makes one tired, beyond what a man can say. The eye is not made full by seeing, and the ear is not filled by hearing. 9 What has happened is what shall happen, and what has been done is what shall be done, and  is nothing new under the Sun. 10 Is there a thing concerning which one says: “Look at this! It is new” – ? Even now it has existed throughout eternities. What exists existed before us. 11 There is no remembrance of  that existed before, and also for the ones that are coming after  will not be  remembrance with  who  will come after them.

	12 Inye, Cohelet, náne aran Israélo Yerúsalemesse. 13 Ar panyanen endanya ceşien ar minaşurien sailiénen ilqua ya ná carna nu Anar. Ta ná i naica perperie ya Eru ánie Atanin moien sánen. 14 Cennen ilye i cardar yar nar cárine nu Anar, ar yé! ilqua náne lustie ar roitie súriva. 15 Ya raica ná mo ua pole care téra, ar ya vanwa ná mo ua pole note. 
	16 Inye quente endanyasse: “Yé, olólien túra ar samin amba sailie lá illi i turner Yerúsalemesse nó ni, ar endanya ecénie olya sailie ar istya. 17 Ar antauvan endanya istien sailie ar istya ar istien *handelórie ar úhandie.” Istan i yú si ná roitie súriva. 18 An olya sailiénen ea olya naire, ar ye napane istyaryan napane aiceryan.

	12 I, Qoheleth, was king of Israel in Jerusalem. 13 And I put my heart to seeking and inquiring into with wisdom everything that is done under the sun. That is the painful suffering that God has given men to be afflicted by it. 14 I saw all the deeds that are done under the sun, and behold! everything was emptiness and pursuit of wind. 15 What is crooked one cannot make straight, and what is lost one cannot count.
	16 I said in my heart: “Behold, I have become great and I have more wisdom than all that ruled in Jerusalem before me, and my heart has seen much wisdom and knowledge. 17 And I shall give my heart to knowing wisdom and knowlege and to knowing witlessness and foolishness.” I know that also this is a pursuit of wind. 18 For by much wisdom there is much sorrow, and who adds to his knowledge adds to his pain.


RANTA 2
Inye quente endanyasse: “Tula sí! Tye-tyastuvan alassenen, ar cena ya mára ná!” Mal yé! yú ta náne  lustie. 2 Lalienna quenten: “*Handelórie!”, ar alassenna: “Mana mára si care?” 3 Sámen i inca i valtauvanen hrávenya limpenen, mal turumnen endanya saliénen, hépala úhandie tenna cennen mana náne i arya ya ece atanin care coivielto andiesse. 4 Carnen cardanyar ambe túre. Carastanen imnin coali. Empannen imnin tarwali liantassion. 5 Carnen imnin tarwali ar aldarwe pelelli, ar empannen mi tai aldali yavila ilya yáve. 6 Carnen imnin tampoli nenen, antaven nén i lauyala taure aldaiva. 7 Ñenten hanwe ar inye núror, ar i móli nóne i coasse náner napánine nin. Yú lámáreli mondoiva ar mámaiva sámen, úvie lá ya illi i enger nó inye Yerúsalemesse sámer.

CHAPTER 2
I said in my heart: “Come now! I will test you with joy, and see  which is good!” But behold! also that was emptiness. 2 To laughing I said: “Witlessness!”, and to joy: “What good does this do?” 3 I had the idea that I was going to stir up my flesh with wine, but I was going to control my heart with wisdom, keeping folly until I saw what was the best that it is possible for men to do for the length of their life.  4 I made my deeds greater. I built for myself houses. I planted for myself gardens of vines. 6 I made for myself gardens and tree-grown enclosures , and I planted in them trees bearing every fruit.  I made for myself cisterns for water, to give water to the growing forest of trees. 7 I got male and female servants, and the thralls born in the house were added to me. Also flocks of oxen and sheep I had, abundant beyond  which all that were before me in Jerusalem had.

8 Comyanen imnin telpe ar malta véla, yú ya mirwa ná i araniva ar i ménaron. Ñenten lindoli ar lindeli, ar i antúra alasse nerion – nís, é nisseli. 9 Ollen ambe túra ar sámen amba lá aiquen ye enge Yerúsalemesse nó ni. Ente, sailienya termarne óni. 10 Ar ilqua ya hendunyat arcanet uan hempe oa tullo; lá enge alasse ya váquenten endanyan. An endanya náne valima ilya mólomenyanen, ar ta náne rantanya ilya mólomenyallo. 11 Ar quernen imne ilye cardanyannar yar mánya carne, ar i mólomenna yanen monten ar mólen, ar yé! ilqua náne lustie ar roitie súriva, ar lá enge ñetie nu Anar. 

8 I gathered to myself silver and gold alike, also what is precious of the kings and of the regions. I got male singers and female singers, and the greatest joy of men – a woman, indeed women. 9 I became great and I had more than anyone who was in Jerusalem before me. Furthermore, my wisdom remained with me. 10 And everything that my eyes requested I did not keep away from them;  was not  joy that I refused my heart. For my heart was happy in all my hard work, and that was my part  from all my work. 11 And I turned myself to all my deeds that my hand did, and to the hard work with whch I toiled and worked, and behold! Everything was emptiness and a pursuit of wind, and  was no profit  under the sun.

	12 Ar inye querne imne cenien sailie ar *handelórie ar úhandie. An mana sé caruva ye tule apa i aran? Ya exeli acárier nóvo! 13 Ar inye cenne i arya lá úhandie ná sailie, ve cala arya lá mornie ná. 14 Ye saila ná same hendu caryasse, mal i auco vanta morniesse. Ono yú inye ista in illi mici te samuvar i imya marto.
	15 Ar inye quente endanyasse: “I marto ya i auco samuva hiruva yú ní. Tá mana castan inye eñétie sailie ta úvea?”  Ar quenten endanyasse i yú si lustie ná. 16 An i saila ar i auco véla uar samuva oira enyalie. An mí rí yar túlar yando sí, ilqua taltuva *rénello, ar manen i saila qualuva? As i auco!

	12 And I turned myself  to see wisdom and witlessness and foolishness. For what will he do who comes after the king? What others have done previously! 13 And I saw that wisdom is better than foolishness is wisdom, like light is better than darkness. 14 Who is wise has eyes in his head, but the fool walks in darkness. But also I know that all among them shall have the same fate.
	15 And I said in my heart: “The fate that the fool shall have will find me as well. Then for what reason have I got wisdom so abundant?” And I said in my heart that also this is emptiness.16 For the wise one and the fool alike shall not have eternal remembrance. For in the days that are coming even now, everything shall slip from memory, and how will the wise one die? With the fool!

	17 Ar inye téve coivie – an naica i carie carna nu Anar lumna nin, an ilqua ná lustie ar roitie súriva. 18 Ente, inye téve ilya mólomenya yanen monten nu Anar, an mauyane nin hehta sa i neren túlala apa ni. 19 Ar man ista qui nauvas saila hya auco? Mal turuvas ilqua ya ñenten mólomenyanen yanen monten, ar ya carnen sailíénen nu Anar. Yú si lustie ná. 20 Ar inye quernexe ar náne ú estelo mi endanya pa ilya i mólome yanen monten nu Anar. 21 Atan ea yeo mólome ná carna sailiénen ar istyanen ar curunen, mal mauya sen anta rantarya atanen ye ua monte san. Yú si lustie ná, ar túra nyére. 22 An mana ea atanen ilya mólomeryanen ar endaryo mótieryanen, yanen omóties nu Anar? 23 An ilye réryar nar naici ar naire mótieryallo; yando lómisse endarya pene sére. Yú si lustie ná.

	17 And I hated life – for painful the work  done under the sun lies heavy upon me, and everything is emptiness and pursuit of wind. 18 Furthermore, I hated all my hard work with which I toiled under the sun, for I had to  leave it to the man coming after me. 19 And who knows if he will be wise or a fool? But he shall control everything that I got by my hard work with which I toiled, and what I made by wisdom under the sun. Also this is emptiness. 20 And I turned myself and was without hope in my heart concerning all the hard work with which I toiled under the sun. 21 A man  is whose hard work is done with wisdom and with knowledge and with skill, but it is necessary for him to give his part to a man who did not toil for it. Also this is emptiness, and a great grief. 22 For what is  for man in all his hard work and the toil of his heart, with which he has toiled under the sun? 23 For all his days are pains and sorrow from toiling; even at night his heart lacks rest. Also this is emptiness.

	24 Lá ea márie atanen hequa i matis ar sucis ar tyaris endarya cene ya mára ná endesse mólomeryo. Yú si inye cenne utúlie ho Eruo má. 25 An man mate ar man suce arya lá inye? 26  An i atanen ye mane ná henyasse ánies sailie ar istya ar alasse, mal i úcarindon ánies i mótie comiéva ar hostiéva, rie antaven yen mane ná Eruo hendesse. Yú si lustie ná, ar roitie súriva.

	24 There is no happiness for man except that he eats and he drinks and he causes his heart to see  which is good in midst of his hard work. Also this I saw has come from God's hand. 25 For who eats and who drinks better than I? 26 For to the man who is good in his eye he gives wisdom and knowledge and joy, but to the sinner he has given the toil of collecting and gathering, only to give to  who is good in God's eye. Also this is emptiness, and pursuit of wind.

RANTA 3 
Ilquan ea lúme, ar lú ilya natton nu Anar: 2 Lú náven nóna ar lú qualien, lú rerien ar lú tucien i rérina ama, 3 lú nahtien ar lú nestien, lú nancarien ar lú carastien, 4 lú nírin ar lú lalien, lú nairen ar lú liltien, 5 lú hatien sardi ar lú hostien sardi, lú panien i rancu *os exe ar lú laien, 6 lú cestien ar lú hehtien ve vanwa, lú hepien ar lú hatien oa, 7 lú narcien ar lú nemien, lú quilden ar lú quetien, 8 lú melien ar lú tevien, lú ohtan ar lú rainen.

CHAPTER 3
For everything there is an hour, and a time for every affair under the sun: 2 A time to be born and a time for dying, a time for sowing and a time for pulling  sown up, 3 a time for slaying and a time for healing, a time for destroying and a time for building, 4 a time for tears and a time for laughing, a time for sorrow and a time for dancing, 5 a time for throwing stones and a time for gathering stones, a time for putting the arms around another and a time not to, 6 a time for seeking and a time for abandoning as lost, a time for keeping and a time for throwing away, 7 a time for tearing and a time for sewing, a time for silence and a time for speaking, 8 a time for loving and a time for hating, a time for war and a time for peace.

	9 Mana ñetie same ye mole mótieryallo? 10 Inye cenne i mótie ya Eru ánie Atanin mótien sánen. 11 Ilqua carnes vanima lúmeryasse. Yú oire panyanes endaltasse, ananta Atan ua ista minaşure ya Eru acárie, yestallo mettanna. 12 Parnen i munta ná tien arya lá same alasse ar care márie coivieltasse. 13 Ar yú ilya atan – qui matis ar sucis ar cenis márie mi ilya mólomerya, ta ná Eruo anna. 14 Istan in ilqua ya Eru care termare tennoio. San mo ua pole napane, ar sallo mo ua pole mapa oa. Ar Eru acárie sa tyarien queni ruce sello. 15 Ya amartie enge nóvo, ar ya martuva anaie nóvo, ar Eru cesta ya avánie.

	9 What gain has  who works from his toil? 10 I saw the toil that God has given Men to toil with it. 11 Everything he made beautiful in its  time. Also eternity he put in their hearts, and yet Man does not know how to inquire into  which God has done, from beginning to end. 12 I learnt that nothing is for them better than having joy and do good in their life. 13 For also every man – if he eats and drinks and sees good in all his hard work, that is God's gift. 14 I know that everything that God does lasts forever. To it one cannot add, and from it one cannot take away. And God has done  it to cause people to fear him. 15 What has happened existed previously, and what shall happen has been previously, and God seeks what has passed.

	16 Ar ata cennen nu Anar: Anamo nómesse enge i ulca, ar i failo nómesse enge i ulca. 17 Inye quente endanyasse: I faila quén ar i ulca quén Eru namuva, an ea lú ilya natton ar ilquan carna tasse. 18 Ar inye quente endanyasse pa Atani in Eru tyasta te, cenieltan i té mi inte nar celvar. 19 An ea marto Atanion ar ea marto celvaron, ar samuvalte i imya marto: Síve si quale, tambe quale yú i exe, ar ea er faire illin, ar muntasse Atan ná arya lá celva; an ilqua lustie ná. 20 Illi lelyar i imya nómenna. Illi utúlier i astollo ar illi nanwénar i astonna. 21 Man ista qui Atanion faire orta ama, hya qui celvaron faire lelya undu cemenna? 22 Cennen in atanen ea munta arya lá same alasse molieryasse, an ta rantarya ná. An man lavuva sen cene mana martuva apa se?

	16 And again I saw under the sun: In the place of justice was the evil one, and in the just one's place was the evil one. 17 I said in my heart: The just person and the evil person God will judge, for  is a time for every matter and for everthing done there. 18 And I said in my heart concerning men that God tests them, for them to see that they in themselves are animals. 19 For  is Men's fate and  is the fate of animals, and they have the same fate: Like this one dies, so dies also the other, and  is one sprit to all, and in nothing Man is better than an animal; for everything is emptiness. 20 All go to the same place. All have come from the dust and all are returning to the dust. 21 Who knows if Men's spirit rises up, or if the spirit of animals goes down to earth? 22 I saw that for man there is nothing better than to have joy in his hard work, for that is his part. For who will let him see what shall happen after him?

RANTA 4 
Ar quernenyexe ar cenne i lumnainar – ta ya náne carna nu Anar – i lumnainaron nier, ar lá enge aiquen tiutala te. Mí má ion te-lumnaner enge túre, ar lá enge aiquen tiutala te. 2 Tá laitanenye i qualinar i yando sí aquálielte, ambe lá i coivear i coitar en, 3 mal valima lá yúyo ná ye en ua ocoitie, ye ua ecénie ulca carda ya ná carna nu menel. 4 Ar inye cenne ilya mólome ar ilya rátala carda, i tulis ho queno *hrúcen armaroryo; yú si ná lustie ar roitie súriva. 5 I auco panya er má mí exe ar mate véra hráverya. 6 Er má quanta séreo ná arya lá má atta quante mólomeo ar roitiéno súriva. 

CHAPTER 4 
And I turned and saw the oppressed ones – that which is done under the Sun – the tears of the oppressed ones, and there was not anyone comforting them. In the hand of the ones oppressing them there was power, and there was not anyone comforting them. 2 Then I praised the dead ones that even now have died, more than the living ones that live still, 3 but happier than both is  that still has not lived, who has not seen the evil deed that is done under heaven. 4 And I saw all hard work and every excelling deed, that it comes from a person's envy of his neighbor; also this is emptiness and pursuit of wind. 5 The fool puts one hand in the other and eats his own flesh. 6 One hand full of rest is better than two hands full of hard work and of pursuit of wind.

7 Ar inye nanwenne ar cenne lustie nu Anar:  8 Ea nér aqua erinqua; ente, penis yondo hya háno. Mal lá ea tyel mólomeryo; yú henya ua quátina larnen. “Ar man ná i quén yen inye móta, tyarilla imne pene ya mára ná?” Yú si lustie ná – naica natto nas. 

7 And I returned and saw an emptiness under the sun: 8  is a man wholly alone; furthermore, he lacks son or brother. But  is no end to his toil; also his eye is not  filled with riches. “And who is the person for whom I toil, causing myself to lack what is good?” Also this is emptiness – a painful matter it is.

	9 Atta nát valime lá er, an natte mai paityaine mólomettanen. 10 An qui er lanta, i exe pole orta meldorya. Mal horro i erya quenen ye lanta ar péna aiquen ye pole orta se. 11 Ente, qui atta caitat uo, nauvatte lauce, mal manen i erinqua quén nauva lauca? 12 Ar qui quén turúva ye erinqua ná, atta taruvat senna. *Nelwaliaina lanya ua nauva rácina lintave. 13 Náve penya mal saila seldo ná arya lá náve yára mal *auca aran, ye ua ambe ista came peantie. 14 An et mandollo i seldo etelende turien, ómu anes nóna penya i exeo araniesse. 15 Cennen in ilye i coivear i vantar nu Anar hilyaner i seldo, i arano neuro. 16 Lá enge tyel ilye i quenin – illi i tulyanes. Mal queni i rando ya túle apa uar sáme alasse mi sé. É yú si lustie ná, ar roitie súriva. 
	17 Tira talelya lan ménal i coanna Eruva, ar tula hare hlarien ambe lá antaren *yanca ve i aucor carir. An té uar ista in acárielte ulco. 

	9 Two are happier than one, for they  are being well paid by their hard work. 10 For if one falls, the other can raise up his friend. But woe to the single person who falls and is lacking anyone who can raise him up. 11 Furthermore, if two lie together, they  shall be warm, but how will the lonely person be warm? 12 And if a person will conquer  that is alone, two shall stand against him. A triple-twined cord shall not be broken quickly. 13 Being a poor but wise wise boy is better than being an old but foolish king, who does not more knows how to receive instruction. 14 For out of prison the boy went forth to rule, though he was born poor in the kingdom of the other. 15 I saw that all the living that walk under the sun followed the boy, the king's successor. 16  was no end to all the people – all that he led. But people of the age that came after did not have joy in him. Indeed also this is emptiness, and pursuit of wind.
	17 Watch your foot while you are going to the house of God, and come near to hear more than to give  a sacrifice like the fools do. For they do not know that they have done evil.


RANTA 5 
Áva na tyelca antolyanen, ar áva lave endalyan náve acca linta quetien quetta epe Eru. An Eru ea menelde, ar elye cemende. Etta nai quettalyar nauvar mance! 2 An i olos tule túra mótiénen, ar i auco óma rimbe quettainen! 
	3 Íre caril vanda Erun, áva na lenca cariesse ya quentel, an uas same alasse aucossen. Cara ta pa ya ánel vanda! 4 Lá anta vanda ná arya lá in antal vanda ar loita care ya quentel. 5 Áva lave antolyan tyare hrávelya úcare, ar áva quete i mentana quenenna i sá náne loima. Manen ece lyen mere in Eru nauva urşa pa ya equétiel ar nancaruva ya mályat acáriet? 6 An mi úve olorion ar rimbe quettar ea lustie. Mal Erullo ruca!

CHAPTER 5
Do not be hasty with your mouth, and do not let your heart be too quick to speak a word before God. For God is in heaven, and you on earth. Therefore may your words be few! 2 For the dream comes by great toil, and the fool's voice by numerous words.
	3 When you make a promise to God, do not be slow in doing what you said, for he does not have joy in fools. Do that about which you gave a promise! 4 Not to give a promise is better than that you give a promise and fail to do what you said. 5 Do not let your mouth cause your flesh to sin, and do not say to the person sent that it  was a mistake. How is it possible for you to desire that God will be wroth about what you have said and will undo what your hands have made? 6 For in an abundance of dreams and numerous words  is emptiness. But fear God!

7 Qui cenil i penya lumnaina ménasse, ar anan ar failie váquétine, áva fele elmenda pa taiti nati; an er cáno ná túra lá hyana cáno, ar or yúyo ear exeli en ambe túre. 8 Ya cemen anta illin ná; resta ná núro yando i aranen. 9 Ye mele telpe ua samuva fárea telpe, ar ye mele úve ua sanuva i laulesterya farya. Yú si lustie ná. 10 Íre i máre nati olar úvie, i matuvar tai yú olar rimbe. Manen nalte ñetie in haryar tai hequa i polilte yéta tai? 11 Lisse ná i humie yen mole, lá címala qui mantes pitya hya olya. I larya quén pole mate tenna quanta náse, mal uas same sére humien. 12 Ea naica hlíve ya cennen nu Anar: lar hépina yen harya sa malieryan! 13 Ar sana lar ná vanwa mi urra martie. Tá olles atar yondon, mal enge munta máryasse. 14 Síve etelendes amilleryo mónallo, tambe nanwenuvas, autala helda ve túles. Munta mólomeryo mapuvas ya polis cole máryasse. 15 Yú si naica hlíve ná: síve túles, tambe autuvas, ar mana ñetie samis pan omóties i súrin? 16 Yú ilye réryassen morniesse matis, mi túra naire ar hlíve ar rúşe. 17 Yé ya inye ecénie mára ná, ya vanima ná: mate ar suce ar cene márie mí quanda mólomerya yanen mótas nu Anar ter i nóte coivie-ríon ya Eru ánie sen. An ta rantarya ná. 18 Ilya atan yen Eru ánie lar ar armar ar i túre matien talo ar mapien rantarya ar samien alasse mólomeryasse – ta Eruo anna ná. 19 An tá uas rimbave enyale manen mance nar covieryo rí, an Eru hanquete se endaryo alassenen.

7 If you see the poor one oppressed in a region, and justice and fairness denied, do not feel wonder about such things; for one commander is greater than another commander, and over both are others still more great. 8 What earth gives is for all; a field is a servant even to the king. 9  who loves money  will not have enough silver, and  who loves abundance will not think that his livihood suffices. Also this is emptiness. 10 When the good things become abundant, those that eat them also become numerous. How are they a gain to thos that possess them excapt that they can look at them? 11 Sweet is the sleep for  who labors, not heeding if  he ate a little or much. The rich person can eat until he is full, but he does not have rest to sleep. 12  is a painfull illness that I saw under the sun: wealth kept for  who possesses it for his harm! 13 For that wealth is lost in a bad happening. Then he became father to a son, but  was nothing in his hand. 14 Like he went forth from his mother's womb, so he shall return, passing away naked as he came. Nothing of his hard work he shall take  that he can carry in his hand. 15 Also this is a grievous illness: as he came, so he shall pass, and what gain does he have since he has toiled for the wind? 16 Also in all his days he eats in darkness, in great sorrow and illness and anger. 17 Behold what I have seen is good, what is beautiful: to eat and drink and see good in all his hard work with which he toils under the sun though the number of life-days that God has given him. For that is his part. 18 Every man to whom God has given wealth and goods and the power to eat from that and to take his part and to have joy in his heard work – that is God's gift. 19 For then he does not frequently recall how few are the days of his life, for God answers him by the joy of his heart.

RANTA 6 
Ea ulco ya ecénien nu Anar, ar nas túra cemende: 2 Nér yen Eru anta lar ar harmali ar alcar, ar pénas munta ya milyas, mal Eru ua lave sen mate sallo; an hyana quén matuva sa. Si ná lustie ar naica hlíve. 3 Qui híni tuxa nar napánine neren, ar coitas ter rimbe loar ar coivieryo auri nar úvie, mal fearya ua quátina i máriénen ar uas came noire, tá quetin i valima epe sé ná lapse nóna qualina. 4 An lustiesse túles ar morniesse vánes, ar morniesse esserya náne nurtaina. 5 Uas cenne Anar hya sinte sa; si same raine ambe túra lá ta i exeo. 6 Ar au coines ter loar húme lú atta, mal ua cenne márie – ma illi uar lelya i imya nómenna? 

CHAPTER 6 
 is an evil that I have seen under the sun, and it is great on earth: 2 A man to whom God gives riches and treasures and glory, and he is lacking nothing that he longs for, but God does not allow him to eat from it; for another person will eat it. This is emptiness and a grievous disease. 3 If a hundred children are added to a man, and he lives through many years and the days of his life are abundant, but his soul is not filled by the goodness and he does not receive a tomb, then I say that happier than him is a baby born dead. 4 For in emptiness it came and in darkness it passed, and in darkness its name was hidden. 5 It did not see the sun or knew it; this one has peace greater than that of the other. 6 And if it lived for a thousand years two times, but did not see goodness – do not all go to the same place?

7 Ilya queno mólome antoryan ná, mal írerya ua quátina. 8 An manen i saila ná mi nóme arya lá i ta i auco? Mana arya i penyan qui istas manen lenga epe i coirear? 9 Ya i hendu cenit ná arya lá ya i fea mere. Yú si lustie ná, ar roitie súriva. 10 Ya ea acámie esserya nóvo, ar anaie sinwa mana atan ná, ar i lá ece sen mahta i tauranna lá sé. 11 An rimbe quettar tear túra lustie, ar mana ñetie Atan same talo? 12 An man ista mana mára ná atanen mi ilye i luste rí yassen coitas sisse ve leo, pan man nyaruva atanen mana nauva apa se nu Anar? 

7 Every person's toil is for his mouth, but his desire is not filled. 8 For how is the wise one in a better position than that of the fool? What  better for the poor one if he knows how to behave before the living? 9 What the eyes see is beter than what the soul desires. Also this is emptiness, and pursuit of wind. 10 What exists has received its name previously, and  has been known what a man is, and that it is not possible for him to fight against the  mightier than he. 12 For who knows what is good for man in all the empty days in whch he lives here like a shadow, since who shall tell man what will be after him under the sun?

RANTA 7 
Mára esse arya lá millo ná, ar i ré qualmeva arya lá i ré yasse mo náne nóna. 2 Menie coanna naireva ná arya lá menie coanna merendeva, an ta ilya atano metta ná; nai i coivea hepuva sana tercen endaryasse. 3 Naire arya lá lalie ná, an lan i cendele naira ná, i enda ná carna arya. 4 I sailaron enda séra coasse naireva, mal aucoron enda coasse alasseva. 5 Hlare saila queno *naityale ná arya lá hlare aucoron líre. 6 An ve i lamma necelion nu tambin ná i auco lalie, ar yú si lustie ná. 7 An lumnie mapa oa saila queno handasse, ar anna hasta i enda. 8 Natto tyel ná arya lá yestarya; cóle faireo ná arya lá turquima faire. 9 Áva na lintave valtaina rúşenna fairelyasse, an rúşe sere aucoron súmasse. 10 Áva quete: “Manen ná in i vanwie náne arya lá sí?” An ual maquete sie sailiénen. 11 Sailie ná ve aryono ranta: ñetie in cenir Anar. 12 An náve varyaina sailiénen ná ve náve varyaina tyelpenen, mal ya arya ná pa istya ná i sailie hepe ye same sa cuina. 

CHAPTER 7
A good name is better than oil, and the day of death better than the day when one was born. 2 Going to a house of grief is better than going to a house of feast, for that is every man's end; may the living one fix that insight in his heart. 3 Sorrow is better than laughing, for while the face is sad, the heart is made better. 3 Sorrow is better than laughter, for while the face is sad, the heart is made better. 4 The heart of the wise ones are resting in a house of grief, but the heart of fools in the house of joy. 5 To hear a wise person's rebuke is better than hearing the song of fools. 6 For like the sound of thorns under a cauldron is the fool's laughing, and also this is emptiness. 7 For oppression takes away the wise persons intelligence, and a gift  mars the heart. 8 The end of an affair is better than its beginning; patience of spirit is better than a haughty spirit. 9 Do not be quickly stirred to anger in your spirit, for anger rests in the bosom of fools. 10 Do not say: “How is  that the past was better than now?” For you do not ask thusly by wisdom. 11 Wisdom is like the part of an heir: a gain for those that see the sun. 12 For being protected by wisdom is like being protected by money, but what is better about knowledge is that wisdom keeps who has it alive. 

	13 Ela ya Eru care, an man pole care téra ya sé acárie raica? 14 Mi ré alasseva sama alasse, ar mi naica ré á hanya in Eru acárie yúyo véla, pustien atan istiello erya nat pa mana tuluva apa se. 15 Lusta coivienyasse ecénien ilqua: Ea faila quén ye auta failieryasse, ar ea ulca quén ye same anda coivie ulcuryasse. 16 Áva na ita faila, ar áva ná acca saila. Mana castalya merien nancare imle? 
	17 Áva na ita ulca, ar áva na auco; mana castalya merien quale nó i lúme? 18 Cáral mai qui hepil si, ar yú i exello áva hepe oa málya, an ye ruce Erullo hiruva tú yúyo. 19 Sailie ná i sailan polda lá taure neri quean i ear ostosse. 20 An lá ea faila atan cemende, quén ye care márie ar ua úcare. 21 Ar áva cime endalyasse ilye i quettar yar queni quetir, pustien imle hlariello núrolya húta lye. 22 An istal endalyasse i yú elye rimbave uhútie exi. 
	23 Ilya si atyastien sailiénen. Quenten: “Oluvan saila” – mal ta náne haira nillo. 24 I vanwie haira ná, ar tumna, ta tumna! Man ista hiritas? 

	13 Behold what God does, for who can make straight what he has made crooked? 14 In a day of joy have joy, and in a grievous day know that God has made both alike, to stop man from knowing a single thing about what shall come after him. 15 In my empty life I have seen everything:  is a righteous person who passes away in his righteousness, and  is an evil person who has a long life in his evil. 16 Do not be extremely just, and do not be too wise. What is your reason for wishing to destroy yourself? 
	17 Do not be extremely evil, and do not be a fool; what is your reason for wishing to die before the time? 18 You are doing well if you keep this, and also from the other do not keep away your hand, for  who fears God shall find them both. 19 Wisdom is for the wise one stronger than ten mighty men that are in a city. 20 For there is no just man on earth, a person who does good and does not sin. 21 And do not heed in your heart all the words that people speak, to stop yourself from hearing your servant curse you. 22 For you know in your heart that also you frequently have cursed others.
	23 All this I have tested by wisdom. I said: “I will become wise” – but that was far from me. 24 The past is remote, and deep, so deep! Who can find it? 

	25 Inye quernexe, ar endanya merne ista ar hanya ar cesta sailie ar castar, ar ista in ulco úhandie ná, ar in úhandie *handelórie ná. 26 Tá inye hirne i sára lá qualme ná i nís ye neuma ná, yeo enda remba mo, yeo mát naxi nát. Ye mára ná mi Eruo hen uşuva sana nissello, mal úcarindo nauva rembana lo hé.
	27 Yé, si utúvien, equétie Cohelet, napánala er exenna hirien i nonwe, 28 ya feanya en cesta mal uan ihírie: Er atan mici húme utúvien, mal uan hirne erya nís mici sine. 29 Yé, rie si ihírien, in Eru ontane Atani faile, mal té ecestier rimbe panor.

	25 I turned myself, and my heart wanted to know and to understand and to seek wisdom and reasons, and to know that evil is folly, and that folly is witlessness. 26 Then I found that more bitter than death is the woman who is a snare, whose heart entraps one, whose hands are chains.  who is good in God's eye will escape from that woman, but a sinner shall be entrapped by her.
	27 Behold, this I have found, Qoheleth has said, adding one to another to find the sum, 28 which my soul still seeks but I have not found: One man among a thousand I have found, but I did not find a single woman among these. 29 Behold, only this I have found, that God created Men just, but they have have sought numerous plans .

RANTA 8 
Man ve i saila ná, ar man ista lehta natto núte? Atano sailie tyare cendelerya calta, ar naraca cendelerya ahya. 2 Inye quete: “Hepa i arano canwa, castanen vandalyo epe Eru.” 3 Áva mena lintave oa sello. Áva tare mi ulca natto. An ilqua ya i aran mere, caris. 4 An i arano quetta cole túre, ar man quetuva senna: “Mana cáral?”

CHAPTER 8
Who is like the wise one, and who knows how to solve a matter?  Man's wisdom causes his face to shine, and his harsh face changes. 2 I say: “Keep the king's command, by reason of your oath before God.” 3 Do not go quickly away from him. Do not stand in an evil matter. For everything that the king wants, he does. 4 For the king's word carries power, and who will say to him: “What are you doing?” 

	5 Ye himya i canwa ua cenuva naica nat, ar lúme ar namie saila enda istuva. 6 An ilya natton ea lú ar namie, an Atanion ulco lumna tien. 7 An ea *úquen ye ista ya martuva, an man nyaruva sen mana nauva? 8 Lá ea atan túrala i súre, nanhépala sa, ar lá ea quén túrala i ré qualmeryo. Mo ua leryana i ohtallo, ar olcie ua senuva i samir sa. 9 Ilya si cennen íre panyanen endanya ilya carienna carna nu Anar, mi randa yasse atan utúrie atan, málala se. 

5  who sticks to the command shall not see a grievous thing, and time and justice the wise heart shall know. 6 For for every matter there is a time and a judgement, for Men's evil lies heavy upon them. 7 For  is noone who knows what shall happen, for who will tell him what will be? 8  is no man controlling the win, keeping it back, and  is no man controlling the day of his death. One is not released from the war, and wickedness will not free  that have it. 9  is no man controlling the wind, keeping it back, and  is no person controling the day of his death. One is not released from the war, and wickedness does not free  that have it. 9 All this I saw when I put my heart upon every doing done under the sun, in an age in which man has ruled man, hurting him.

	10 Ar endesse sio cennen i olcar panyaine noiriltasse ar mittala sérelta, ómu oantelte i aire nómello ananta camner laitie i ostosse. Yú si lustie ná.
	11 Pan i namie i ulca cardava úne lintave carna, etta Atanion enda olólie canya tesse carien ulco. 12 Ómu ece úcarindon care ulco lú tuxa ananta coita andave, inye en ista in i rucir Erullo samuvar márie, rucieltanen sello. 13 Mal i olca ua samuva márie, ar uas taituva réryar yar nar ve leo, pan uas ruce Erullo. 
	14 Ea lustie ya ná carna cemende: Ear failali i camir ya marta in acárier ulco, ar olcali i camir ya marta in acárier failie. Quetin i yú si lustie ná. 15 Mal inye laitane alasse, an ea munta arya atanen nu Anar lá mate ar suce ar same alasse, ar nai nati sine se-hilyuvar mólomeryasse ter coivieryo rí yar Eru ánie sen nu Anar. 16 Panyanen endanya ñetien sailie ar cenien i quanda carie ya ná carna cemende, an auresse yo lómisse véla queno hen ua cene húme. 17 Tá cennen i quanda carie Eruo, an lá ece atanen hanya i carie carna nu Anar, an ómu atan móta minaşurien sa, en uas hanyuva sa; ente, qui i saila quete in istas sa, lá anwave ece sen hanya.

	10 And in the midst of this I saw the wicked ones being put in their tomb and entering their rest, though they went away from the holy place and yet received praise in the city. Also this is emptiness. 
	15 Since the judgement of the evil deed was not quickly done , therefore Men's heart has become bold in them to do evil. 12 Though it is possible for a sinner to do evil a hundred times and yet live long, I stil know that the those that fear God shall have happiness, by their fear of him. 13 But the wicked shall not have happiness, and he does not prolong his days that are like a shadow, since he does not fear God.
	14  is an emptiness that is done on earth:  are some just ones that receive what happens to  that have done evil, and some wicked ones that receive what happens to  that have done righteousness. I say that also this is emptiness. 15 But I praised joy, for  is nothing better for man under the sun than to eat and drink and have joy, and may these things follow him in his hard work through the days of his life that God has given him under the sun. 16 I set my heart to get wisdom and to see the whole work which is done on earth, for at day and at night alike a person's eye does not see sleep. 17 Then I saw the whole work of God, for it is not possible for man to understand the work done under the sun, for though a man strives to inquire into it, still he will not understand it; furthermore, if the wise one says that he knows it, it is not actually possible for him to understand. 

RANTA 9  
 An ilya si panyanen endanyasse, yando tyastien ilya si: qui i failar ar i sailar ar cardaltar nar mi Eruo má. Melme ar tevie véla – atani uar ista ilqua ya caita epe te. 2 I imya marto hiruva illi: i faila ar i olca, i mane ar poica ar i quén ye úpoica ná, i quén ye *yace ar ye ua *yace. 3 Si ná i naica pa ya ná carna nu Anar: in illi samir i imya marto. Ente, Atanion enda ná quanta ulcuo, ar *handelórie ea endaltasse ter coivielta – ar tá autalte i quelinannar. 4 Mal yen ná imíca i coivear ea estel. An náve coivea huo ná arya lá náve qualina rá. 5 An i coivear istar i qualuvalte, mal i qualinar uar ista erya nat, ar ualte ambe ñete *paityale, an i enyalie téva avánie. 6 Melmelta, tevielta ar *hrúcenelta véla nar metyane yando sí. Tennoio penilte amba ranta mi ilqua ya ná carna nu Anar. 7 Mena, mata massalya arwa alasseo, ar suca limpelya arwa valima endo, an Eru anaie fastana pa carielya sie nó acárielyes. 8 Lava larmalyain illume náve poice, ar áva lave carelyan pene millo. 9 Sama alasse coiviesse as nís ye melil, ilye i rí lusta coivielyo ya Eru ánie lyen nu Anar – ilye luste rélyar, an ta rantalya ná coiviesse ar mólomelyasse yanen mótal nu Anar. 10 Ilqua ya meril care mályanen, ása care melehtelyanen, an lá ea molie hya pano hya istya hya sailie mi Mandos yanna lelyal. 

CHAPTER 9       
For all this I put in my heart, even to test all this: whether the righteous and the wise and their deeds are in God's hand. Love and hatred alike – men do not know everything that lies before them. 2 The same fate will find all: the righteous and the wicked, the good and pure and the one that is unclean, the one who sacrifices and the one that does not sacrifice. 3 This is the grievous  about what is done under the sun: that all have the same fate. Furthermore, Men's heart is full of evil, and witlessness is in their heart through their life – and then they go away to the dead. 4 But for  who is among the living  is hope. For being a living dog is better than being a dead lion. 5 For the living know that they will die, but the dead ones do not know a single thing, and they do not more receive  payment, for the recalling of them has gone away. 6 Their love, their hatred and their envy alike are ended even now. 7 Go, eat your bread having joy, and drink your wine having a happy heart, for God has been pleased about your doing so before you have done it. 8 Let your garments always be white, and do not let your head lack oil. 9 Have joy in life with a woman that you love, all the days of your empty life that God has given you under the sun – all your empty days, for that is your part in life and in your hard work with which you toil under the sun. 10 Everything that you want to do with your hand, do it with your might, for  is not  work or plan or knowledge or wisdom in Mandos to which you go. 

11 Nanwennen cenien nu Anar in i lintar uar turúva i noriesse hya i poldar i ohtasse; ente, i sailar uar samuva massa, hya i veor lar; ente, i istimar uar samuva lisse, an lúme ar marto hirir te illi. 12 An atan yú loita ista lúmerya. Ve lingwi rembane ñwalca rembesse ar ve aiwi mapane neumanen, sie atani nar rembaine mi urra lúme, íre lantas téna rincanen. 

11 I returned to see under the sun that the quick ones will not conquer in the race or the strong ones in the war; furthermore, the wise ones will not have bread, or the ablebodied men riches; furtherfore, the knowledgeable will not have grace, for time and fate find them all. 12 For man also fails to know his time. Like fishes entangled in a cruel net and like birds seized by a snare, so men are being entrapped in an evil hour, when it falls upon them suddenly . 

13 Yú sailie sina ecénien nu Anar, ar nemnes túra nin: 14 Enge pitya osto yasse enger nótime ennoli, ar túle sanna túra aran ar pelde sa, ar carastanes hoe cumbeli sanna. 15 Mal enge tasse penya nér ye saila né, ar rehtanes i osto sailiéryanen. Ono lá enge erya quén ye enyalde sana penya nér. 
	16 Ar inye quente: Sailie arya lá poldore ná, mal i penyo salie ná nattíraina, ar *úquen lasta quettaryannar.
	17 Sailaron quettar, hláraine quildesse, nar arye lá i turco rambi mici aucor. 
	18 Sailie arya lá carmar ohto ná, mal er úcarindo nancaruva olya márie.

13 Also this wisdom I have seen under the sun, and it seemed great to me: 14  was a small city in which  were few people, and  came against it a mighty king and surrounded it, and he built big  mounds against it. 15 But  was there a poor man who was wise, and he saved the city with his wisdom. But  was not a single person who remembered that poor man.
	16 And I said: Wisdom is better than strenght, but the poor one's wisdom is being despised, and no one listens to his words.
	17 The words of wise ones, being heard in silence, are better than the shouts of the chief among fools.
	18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but one sinner can undo much goodness.

 
RANTA 10
Íre mo cára laive, qualine setti caruvar i millo şaura ar holwea. Lunga lá sailie ar alcar ná pitya úhandie. 2 I sailo enda tuce se foryanna, mal i auco enda tuce se hyaryanna. 3 Yando lan vanteas mi malle, i auco pene hande. Lavis ilquenen ista i náse auco.

RANTA 10   
When one is making salve, dead flies will make the oil putrid and stinky. Heavier than wisdom and glory is a little folly. 2 The wise one's heart draws him to the right, but the fool's heart draws him to the left. 3 Even while he is walking in a street, the fool lacks intelligence. He lets everyone know that he is a fool.

	4 Qui i turco rúşe orta lyenna, áva hehta nómelya, an quilde panya túre úcari sérenna. 5 Ea naica nat ya ecénien cemende, ve loima ya etelelya yello ture: 6 I auco ná panyaina mi rimbe minde nómi, lan mauya láreain hame i nalda nómesse. 7 Ecénien núror hárala rocconnar ar haryoni vantala cemende ve núror. 8 Ye sape latta lantuva minna sa, ar ye narca undu ramba nauva nácina lo leuca. 9 Ye hócire sarni nauva harna tainen, ar ye rista rundar ná raxesse ho tai.

	9 If the chief's wrath rises against you, do not abandon your place, for silence puts great sins to rest. 5  is a grievous thing that I have seen on earth, as a mistake that goes forth from  who rules: 6 The fool is being put in many prominent places, while it is necessary for rich ones to sit in the lowly place. 7 I have seen servants sitting upon horses and princes walking on earth like servants. 8  who digs a pit shall fall into it, and  that tears down a wall shall be bitten by a snake. 9  who quarries  stones shall be wounded by them, and  who cleaves pieces of wood is in danger from them.

	10 Íre i pelecco ilaica ná, ar mo ua acárie i ríma maica, ea maure amba poldoréva. Mal sailie arya ná ar lave mon ñete ya mo mere. 11 Qui i leuca nace peniénen sairine quettaiva, i heru i lambo ñete munta aşea cururyanen. 12 Quettar antollo i sailo talar lisse, mal i auco peu ammatit se. 13 I yesta quettaron antorya úhandie ná, ar quetieryo metta ulca *handelórie ná. 14 I auco quete rimbe quettar, mal *úquen ista mana nauva. Man nyaruva atanen mana nauva apa se?

	10 When the axe is blunt, and one has not made the edge sharp,  is need of more strength. But wisdom is better and lets one get what one wants. 11 If the snake bites for the lack of magical words, the master of the tongue gains nothing beneficial by his skill. 12 Words from the mouth of the wise one bring grace, but the fool's lips  devour him. 13 The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talk is evil witlessness. 14 The fool speaks many words, but no one knows what will be. Who will tell a man what shall be after him?

	15 I auco mólome yerya se, tenna yando uas ista hire i tie i ostonna. 
	16 Horro lyen, a nóre yó aran ná hína, ar yó haryoni matir i arinello.
	17 Mána nalye, a nóre yó aran ná arquenion yondo, ar yó haryoni matir i vanima lúmesse, poldoren ar lá quatien inte limpenen.
	18 Tópa núta íre mo feuya molie, ar íre i ranqui lantar, limbar tenir i coa.
	19 Lalien queni carir meren, ar limpe napane alasse coivien, mal tyelpe ná i hanquenta ilquan. 
	20 Yando sanwelyassen áva húta i aran, ar mi caimasambelya áva yale ulco i láreanna. An menelo aiwi colir ómalya; i rámavoiti polir apanta quettalyar.

	15 The fool's hard work wears him out, until he cannot even find the way to the city.
	16 Woe to you, O land whose king is a child, and whose princes eat from the morning .
	17 Blessed you are, O land whose king is the son of nobles, and whose princes eat at the proper time, for strength and not to fill themselves with wine.
	18 A roof sinks  when one abhors working, and when the arms fall, drops enter the house.
	19 To laugh people make a feast, and wine adds joy to life, but money is the answer to everything. 
	20 Even in your thoughts do not curse the king, and in your bedchamber do not call evil upon the rich one. For the birds of heaven carry your voice; the winged ones can reveal your words.

RANTA 11 
Á menta massalya i cendelenna nenion, an apa rimbe rí enhiruvalyes. 2 Á anta ranta otson ar yú tolton, an ual ista mana urra nat martuva cemende. 3 Qui i lumbor nar quante, ulyuvalte ulo cemenna. Ar qui alda lanta, hyarmenna hya formenna – yasse i alda lanta, tasse caituvas.
	4 Ye cime i súre ua reruva; ye yéta i lumbor ua *cirihtuva. 5 Síve ual ista manna i súre lelya, hya manen i axor nar cantaine mónasse i nisso ye ná as lapse, tambe ual ista i carie Eruo ye care ilqua. 6 Arinde rera erdelya, ar şinyenna áva lave mályan sere, an ual ista mana nauva herenya, si hya i exe, hya qui mine nauva ve mára ve i exe. 7 Lisse i cala ná, ar aşea ná i hendun cene Anar. 8  Yú qui i loar nauvar rimbe, nai atan samuva alasse mi tai illi, mal caris mai qui sanas pa i rí morniéva, an nauvalte rimbe. Ilya si lustie ná.

CHAPTER 11
Send your bread upon the face of the waters, for after many days you will find it again. 2 Give a part to seven and to eight as well, for you do not know what bad thing will happen on earth. 3 And if a tree falls, to the south or to the north – where a tree falls, there it shall lie. 
	4  who heeds the wind shall not sow;  who looks at the clouds shall not reap. 5 As you do not know where the wind goes, or how the bones are being shaped in the womb of the woman who is with child, so you to not know the work  of God who does  everything. 6 In morning sow your seed, and towards evening do not let your hand rest, for you do not know what will be fortunate, this or the other, or if one will be as good as the other. 7 Sweet is the light, and beneficial it is to the eyes to see the sun. 8 Also if the years shall be numerous, may a man have joy in them all, but he does well if he thinks about the days of darkness, for they shall be numerous. All this is emptiness.

9 Sama alasse, vinyamo, mi nesselya, ar lava endalyan náve valima mi vielyo rí. Á vanta mi endalyo tier ar hendulyato íri, mal á ista i pa ilye nati sine Eru lye-taluva namienna. 10 Etta á mapa oa naire endalyallo ar aice hrávelyallo, an nesse ar ára coiviéno nar lustie.

9 Have joy, youngster, in your youth, and let your heart be happy in the days of your youthfulness. Walk in the paths of your heart and the desires of your eyes , but know that concerning all these things God will bring you to judgement. 10 Therefore take away sorrow from your heart and pain from your flesh, for youth and dawn of life are emptiness.

RANTA 12  
Enyala ye lye-ontane mi rí nesselyo, nó i naice rí utúlier, ar i loar eténier pa yar quetuval: “Uan same alasse mi tai” 2 – nó Anar ole morna, yú i cala ar Işil ar i eleni, ar i lumbor nanwénar apa i ulo. 3 Tá i tirir i coa palir, ar i neri cáneva nútar, ar i nissi i mulir pustar pan olólielte acca mance, ar i yétat ter i lattin cenit nécave. 4 Ar i andu i mallenna nát holtane, ar i lamma muliéno fifírua, ar mo orta i lammanen aiweo, mal ilye lindala ómar olir quilde. 5 Tá mo ruce ampendello ar ná ruhtaina i tiesse. I *cuivealda losta, i *salquecápo tucixe, ar mo ua ambe pole valta yére. An atan lelya oira coaryanna, ar i se-nainuvar ocómar mí malle 6 – nó i telemna ipsin nauva cirna, ar i maltasalpe nauva rácina, ar i calpa ara i ehtele nauva ascátina, ar i querma or i tampo nauva rácina, 7 ar i asto nanwene cemenna yasse anes, ar i faire nanwene Erunna ye antane sa. 
	8 Lustie mi lustiéron, quete Cohelet; ilqua lustie ná!    

CHAPTER 12 
Recall  who created you in the days of your youth, before the grievous days have come, and the years have arrived about which you will say: «I do not have joy in them» – 2 before the sun becomes dark, also the light and the moon, and the clouds are returning after the rain. 3 Then  that watch the house tremble, and the men of valour stoop, and the women that grind cease since they have become too few, and the  that look through the window see dimly. 4 And the gates  are closed, and the sound of grinding is fading away, and one rises at the sound of a bird, but all singing voices become silent. 5 Then one fears for a slope and is being terrifed on the way. The almond tree blooms, the grasshopper draws itself , and one cannot more stir desire. For man goes to his eternal house, and those that will lament him are gathering in the street 6 – before the silvery thread shall be cut, and the gold-bowl shall be broken, and the water-vessel by the spring shall be broken asunder, and the wheel over the cistern shall be broken, 7 and the dust returns to earth where it was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it.
	8 Emptiness of emptinesses, says Qoheleth; everything is emptiness!

	9 Ente, Cohelet náne saila, ar peantane i lien pa istya, ar carnes úviéli ar minaşuriéli.  *Partanes rimbe equesseli. 10 Cohelet cestane hire melwe quettar ar tece vanime quettar – quettar nanwiéva. 11 I sailaron quettar nar ve tildi, ar ve taxi nambane minna nar queni i samir combi equessiva; nalte antane lo Er Mavar. 12 Ar han nati sine, yonya, á ista raxelya: Lá ea tyel i cariéno rimbe parmaiva, ar ole ceşitat yerya i hráve.

	9 Furthermore, Qoheleth was wise, and he instructed the people about knowledge, and he made considerations and inquiries. He arranged numerous proverbs. 10 Qoheleth sought to find lovely words and write right words – words of truth. 11 The words of the wise ones are like spikes , and like nails hammered in are people that have collections of proverbs; they are given by One Shepherd. 12 And beyond these things, my son, know your danger:  is no end to the making of numerous books, and to much examine them wears out the flesh.

	13 I natto telma, íre ilqua anaie hlárina: Ruca Erullo ar hepa axanyar. An ta ná ilqua ya mauya atanin care. 14 An Eru taluva ilya carie mir namie, as ilya nulda nat, cenien qui nas mára hya ulca.
	13 The conclusion of the matter, when everything has been heard: Fear God and keep his commandments. For that it everything that is necessary for men to do. 14 For God shall bring every work into into judgement, with every secret thing, to see if it is good or evil.

